User Name: = mrichardson@mediainvestmentprojects.comDate and Time: = 2022-03-24Job Number: = 167357182Documents (1)Client/Matter: -None-Search Terms: ketanji brown jacksonSearch Type: NaturalAndContent TypeNarrowed bynewsSources: News Transcripts 1. Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3

Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3CQ TranscriptionsMarch 23, 2022 WednesdayCopyright  2022 CQ-Roll Call, Inc.	All Rights ReservedAll materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ Transcriptions. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.BodySenate Judiciary: The Nomination Of Ketanji Brown Jackson To Be An Associate Justice Of The Supreme Court Of The United States (Day 3)March 23, 2022 09:00 A.M.SPEAKERS:SEN. DICK DURBIN (D-ILL.), CHAIRMAN SEN. PATRICK LEAHY (D-VT.) SEN. DIANNE FEINSTEIN (D-CALIF.) SEN. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (D-R.I.) SEN. AMY KLOBUCHAR (D-MINN.) SEN. CHRISTOPHER COONS (D-DEL.) SEN. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (D-CONN.) SEN. MAZIE K. HIRONO (D-HAWAII) SEN. CORY BOOKER (D-N.J.) SEN. ALEX PADILLA (D-CALIF.) SEN. JON OSSOFF (D-GA.) SEN. CHUCK GRASSLEY (R-IOWA), RANKING MEMBERSEN. LINDSEY GRAHAM (R-S.C.) SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R-TEXAS) SEN. MIKE LEE (R-UTAH) SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TEXAS) SEN. BEN SASSE (R-NEB.) SEN. JOSH HAWLEY (R-MO.) SEN. TOM COTTON (R-ARK.) SEN. JOHN KENNEDY (R-LA.) SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-N.C.) SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN (R-TENN.) SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOMINEE KETANJI BROWN JACKSON [*]DICK DURBIN: The Senate Judiciary Committee will come to order. We have two senators, Senator Ossoff of Georgia, Senator Tillis of North Carolina, who will do their 30 minutes of questioning to complete the agenda from yesterday. And then each Senator will be allowed 20 minutes to ask questions if they wish, but the chair is more than anxious to entertain efforts to yield back your time. I'm sure that the witness, Judge Jackson, would appreciate it as much as all of us in that respect. I'm going to make an opening statement. Senator Grassley is going to do the same and then we will proceed with the questions by the two senators. First, I would say, Judge Jackson, that I thought that President Biden got it right yesterday. He tuned in and watched the proceedings, and said you showed both grace and dignity. I've used the phrase grace under pressure and it's been referred to by many people. This is a -- a tough assignment and many have risen to the challenge, but none as well as you did yesterday. Thank you for doing it so much. I would just say this. Much of what we heard from a handful of senators yesterday has to be put in context. The overwhelming majority of senators on both sides I thought were answer --  asking appropriate questions and positive in their approach and respectful of the nominee before us. But, for many of senators, yesterday was an opportunity to showcase talking points for the November election. For example, all Democrats are soft on crime, therefore this nominee must be soft on crime. Well, you've made a mess of their stereotype. The endorsement of the Fraternal Order of Police, the International Association of Chiefs of Police just doesn't fit with their stereotype of a Harvard grad Black woman who is aspiring to the highest court in the land, but you earned it. Law enforcement is on your side because you've been on their side in critical moments. And your family has dedicated a big part of their lives to law enforcement, and you obviously believe it at your core. You've said that over and over again. So, the soft on crime charge, which leads all others, falls on its face.The second thing is that you are somehow out of the mainstream when it comes to child pornography cases. And of course, that gets down to the question of sentencing and your choices in sentencing. It is difficult if not impossible for each of us to put ourselves in your place when you are facing all  --  the totality of facts concerning a certain defendant, then looking at your requirements under the law as enacted by Congress and trying to do the right thing, to keep America safe but to mete justice. You are in the same place as 80 percent of federal judges when it comes to sentencing on child pornography cases, 80 percent. And of course, Congress is not without fault. We have failed to pick up the responsibility that was assigned to us some 17 years ago when the Supreme Court decided that the basic guidelines would not be mandatory on judges. We should have stepped in at that point. But it's a tough, hard, controversial subject, and we've stayed away from it. And what has happened is the judges have tried to make do with a fractured situation where they have guidelines that are advisory. They have opinions coming to them about sentencing from the government as well as from probation office and others. So, I would say that the bottom line is this. You have done what 80 percent of the judges have done. You are in the mainstream of sentencing when it comes to child pornography cases. I also think it's ironic that the senator from Missouri who unleashed this discredited attack refuses to acknowledge that his own choice for a federal judge in the Eastern District of Missouri has done exactly what you did. You also have been critic  --  criticized as having been wrong to be a public defender or even to be in a law firm representing a Guantanamo detainee. It's interesting that Republican judges, very conservative ones, don't see this as a blemish on your character. They understand, as we do, that the Sixth Amendment creates a responsibility that people have a right to counsel. You have exercised that responsibility in your professional life. This, incidentally, yesterday turned  --  your nomination turned out to be a testing ground for conspiracy theories and culture war theories. The more bizarre the charges against you and your family, the more I understand the social media scoreboard lit up yesterday. I'm sorry that we have to go through this. These are not theories that are in the mainstream of America, but they have been presented here as such. Finally, you are a respected, successful woman of color. You've been approved three times by this committee for increasingly significant judicial assignments. Now the President of the United States has chosen you to serve on the highest court of the land. America is ready for the Supreme Court glass ceiling to finally shatter. And you, Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson, are the person to do it. Senator Grassley? JOHN CORNYN: Mr. Chairman? DICK DURBIN: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Mr. Chairman, I think you've in the main provided both sides an opportunity to be heard and ask their questions. But unfortunately, I noticed that, after every series of questioning on this side of the aisle, you choose to editorialize and contradict the points being made by this side of the aisle. I don't know whether we will have an equal and  --  opportunity to editorialize about the advocacy that you and your colleagues  --  the points that you're trying to make. I especially was concerned that, after my questioning yesterday, I left the hearing room, and you chose to come back after a break and raise with the judge a point that I had asked her about and which I, frankly, think was misrepresenting my position and what the facts are with regard to whether the judge has accused President George W. Bush and Donald Rumsfeld of  --  of war crimes. My  --  my language was  --  I asked her whether she'd called them a war criminal and she said under oath to you, no, I did not, although the record is plain as it can be that she accused them of war crimes. Now, I don't understand the difference between calling somebody a war criminal and accusing them of war crimes. Maybe in some  --  some other foreign language that I don't, frankly, understand maybe that would make sense, but not in accordance with the common understanding of the English language. So, I just don't  --  I  --  I just want to lodge a protest and say that I don't think it's appropriate for the chairman, after every time somebody on this side of the aisle asks questions of the judge, you come back and you denigrate and you attack and you criticize the line of questioning. I think the judge is doing a pretty good job of defending her own position and answering questions. So, thank you for giving me a chance to express my objection to the way that you've been editorializing after each time this side of the aisle asks questions. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cornyn. JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman? DICK DURBIN: Excuse me. JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman? DICK DURBIN: Excuse me. Thank you, Senator Cornyn. It's known as chairman's time. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Could I make my statement first? DICK DURBIN: You want to make your statement? CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. JOHN KENNEDY: Well, I  --  may I respond to what Senator Cornyn said? DICK DURBIN: Well, you  --  if you want to speak before your ranking member  -- JOHN KENNEDY: May I? Thank you. DICK DURBIN: It's entirely your right. JOHN KENNEDY: Mr. Chairman, I  --  I agree with Senator Cornyn. You and I have talked about this before. I have great respect for you. You know that. But I've had the same issue in normal hearings, non-Supreme Court hearings, where you make editorial comments after our question. I appreciate your input, but they're not offered in an evenhanded way, and I just don't think it's productive. [*]JOHN KENNEDY: I mean, you just referred by name to Senator Hawley. I think he should have a chance to respond. You know, this is America. We have the right to express ourselves, you know, you're not free if you can't say what you think. And I just -- I want to join my colleague, Senator Cornyn. I just don't think it's appropriate, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: It's called Chairman's time. It is a tradition in this committee exercised by Senator Lindsey Graham as Chairman and Senator Grassley in previous Supreme Court -- JOHN KENNEDY: But they didn't do it the way you do it. DICK DURBIN: I'm going to. I'm going to allow you to be heard, but I want to be heard  -- JOHN KENNEDY: Of course. DICK DURBIN: --  without interruption. JOHN KENNEDY: Of course. DICK DURBIN: And so in the minority, we waited through Chairman's time when we had Republican Chairs. There will not be a separate set of rules for Democrats in control of this committee. That was used as a response time and again by both of those Senators, and it was accepted. If what I said was somehow problematic or painful yesterday, I'm sorry, but the Democrats are going to use the same mechanisms that the Republicans have used in this committee. JOHN KENNEDY: And I  --  I appreciate that Mr. Chairman, but I think if you're going to personalize it as to  --  as to Senators by name, you ought to give them a chance to respond. DICK DURBIN: Well, they will have a chance  -- JON OSSOFF: Mr. Chairman  -- DICK DURBIN: --  each and every Senator has 20 minutes today to respond if they wish. JON OSSOFF: Mr. Chairman  -- DICK DURBIN: Who's seeking? Senator Ossoff. JON OSSOFF: Could we hear from Ranking Member Grassley? And then I'd like the opportunity to ask questions on behalf of the state of Georgia. I think the American public is now tuning into these proceedings expecting a substantive discussion of matters of grave importance to the country with a nominee for the Supreme Court before us. I don't think we've set an appropriate tone by bickering over time and process at the outset of our proceedings. Every Senator deserves to be heard. I would like to humbly request that Ranking Member Grassley make a statement, that I and Senator Tillis have our opportunity to question the nominee, and that then we can litigate balls and strikes from yesterday's hearing. Would that be acceptable to the committee? DICK DURBIN: I think in the name of your humility, we should do that. [Laughter] JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Senator Grassley. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. Senator Ossoff my statement doesn't quite fit in with what you asked, but I  --  I feel like I have to say it anyway because of the conflict that happened late last night. But before I do, I want to somewhat tongue in cheek, but with some seriousness as well, when the Chairman's quoted Biden as saying that Justice Jackson  --  or Judge Jackson handled herself with grace and dignity, I want to compliment the Democrats on this committee for using grace and dignity unlike it was during the Kavanaugh hearings. Thank you all very much for making this  --  I've heard a lot of compliments about how this is a way a hearing ought to be held. So I want to address that issue that was raised yesterday about records. Senator Cruz raised a very legitimate question about data related to US probation officer recommendations. The White House and members of this committee used that information to attempt to discredit information raised by Senator Hawley and others about the nominee's sentencing record as a district judge. No one on our side of the aisle had access to this information. In fact, before this past week, I'm not sure anyone, but the probation office and the court had access to this information. My understanding is that the probation office recommendations aren't part of any public record. Those specific sentencing recommendations aren't always shared with prosecutors or defendants. Somehow, it appears that the White House obtained this information. It was leaked in pieces to media outlets in order to cast doubt on legitimate members questions. And then it was provided to only Democratic members of this committee without any of the underlying documentation. I'd like to add my name to the letters that are requesting at least  --  well, this is Senator Lee's letter request for at least the probation office recommendations so that we can be sure of the data handed out by Democratic staff last night. I'd also like to add my name and have added my name to Senator Cruz's follow up request for access to any other data that might be shared with our colleagues on the other side. One last thing to suggest that all that we have to do is ask for information doesn't pass muster. You can't ask for information you don't know if it exists. I've asked for nonpublic records related to the judge's tenure on the Sentencing Commission. Those have not been produced just like 48,000 pages of records withheld by the White House. How is the United States Senate supposed to review a record that we don't have. This price  --  this process might be timely, but it's neither thorough nor fair to the American public. And I hope we can rectify that. I yield. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Grassley. Senator Ossoff. JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Grassley, and Judge. Good morning. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good morning, Senator JON OSSOFF: Welcome back. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. JON OSSOFF: We had a late night doing our job as Senators and you as a nominee, and we're off to a morning start. I was considering asking you if you were a coffee or a tea drinker, but I thought that might be too personal and immaterial to the question of your nomination. [Laughter] I want to begin inspired by the presence of my brother, Senator Reverend Warnock, who's joined us this morning. In a spirit of national unity offering thanks for these proceedings, for our Constitution, for this opportunity to air in public before the American people a vital grappling with ideas core to our republic, questions of the role of branches of government, questions of the proper role of judges in our society, questions that keep the peace and  --  and ensure that this remains a nation of laws. As I noted in my opening statement a couple of days ago, democracy is the exception and not the norm in history or around the world. And this public exercise is a vital one. And so I'm thankful for it. I'm thankful that the American people have the opportunity to observe it. And I'm thankful for your presence, judge, for your service to the country throughout your life as a district judge, as an appellate judge, as a member of the US Sentencing Commission, as a nominee for the court. So thank you for being here. Thank you for subjecting yourself and your family to an intrusive, at times cruel and unfair, but on the whole necessary and proper process of scrutiny as you are considered for this appointment. The American people who are now tuning in for the second day of these proceedings are hearing about your approach to the law, to your role as a judge, and as a potential Supreme Court justice. And they're also getting to know you personally. And we've had the opportunity to hear a bit about your family, your background. I think it's also appropriate that the American public hear a bit more about your brother's story. As I understand it, served the Baltimore Police Department, served in the US Army. Before we turn to matters of law, will you please help introduce yourself and your family to the American public as you seek this lifetime appointment? Tell us a bit about him and his story. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. My brother followed in a long tradition in my family of public service. It was a core family value. My parents were both public servants and my mother's  --  two of my mother's brothers were career law enforcement. And my brother and I are almost a decade apart in age. And he, I think, looked up to my uncles who were often around in their uniforms, keeping their weapons away from the kids by putting them up on high shelves. And we  --  we looked up to them and we understood through their service what it meant to give back to your community. My brother went to college, a historically black college, Howard University, here in Washington DC, after growing up in Miami and decided to follow my  --  follow in my uncle's footsteps. He could have done many things coming out of college with a college degree, but decided he wanted to be a police officer and went to Baltimore, which as many of you know struggles like many cities with  --  with areas that are  --  have a lot of crime. And it was a very  --  it was a very stressful period for us as a family because as proud as we are of his service, as much as we know it's important, law enforcement is a dangerous profession. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And as family members, you worry when you don't get the phone call, when you haven't heard for a couple of days, when you hear about things in the news in the community, you worry. And so, I grew up with family members who put their lives on the line. I understand the need for law enforcement, the importance of having people who are willing to do that important work, the importance of holding people accountable for their criminal behavior. I also, as a lawyer and a citizen, believe very strongly in our Constitution and the rights that make us free. And what that means to me is an understanding that, although we need accountability, although there is crime, we also have a society that ensures that people who have been accused of criminal behavior are treated fairly. That is what our Constitution requires. That is what makes our system so exceptional. My brother understood that as part of his work, and he also served in the military. He also decided, as many people did, to defend our country after 9/11, that he would go into the Army. And I remember when he made that decision, he had a college degree. He could have been an officer right away. He could have been a type of military officer that didn't have to actually be on the battlefield. And I remember saying, are you going to do something with, you know, radio signals? Are you going to be behind the scenes? And he said, no, no, I'm going to be infantry, boots on the ground. He said I believe strongly in the protection of our country. And if I'm going to be leading, I'm going to be out front. That's the kind of person my brother is. It's the kind of service that our family provides. And for me, what that meant was an understanding that, to defend our country and its values, we also needed to make sure that, when we responded as a country to the terrible attacks on 9/11, we were upholding our constitutional values, that we weren't allowing the terrorists to win by changing who we are. And so, I joined with many lawyers during that time who were helping the courts figure out the limits of executive authority consistent with what the framers have told us is important, the limitations on government. I worked to protect our country, my brother worked on the frontlines, and it was all because public service is important to us. JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Let's talk a bit about limitations on power. Our Constitution is a document that renounces monarchism and instead establishes a republic. You, in a opinion that has been widely cited, made the observation that presidents are not kings. What does that mean? And what are some of the most important bulwarks in our constitutional system against the abuse of executive power, against tyranny? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Our constitutional scheme, the design of our government, is erected to prevent tyranny. The framers decided, after experiencing monarchy, tyranny, and the like, that they were going to create a government that would split the powers of a monarch in several different ways. One was federalism. It was vertical. They would split the powers between the federal government and states. Another was to prevent the federal government from itself becoming too powerful, from having all of the authorities, from having legislative, executive, and judicial authority concentrated in one place. So, the Constitution, in its design, puts the legislative authority in Article One and gives it to the Congress, the power to make laws. It puts the executive authority in Article Two and gives it to the president, the power to execute the laws. And it puts the judicial authority, the power to interpret the laws, in Article Three and gives it to the court. The separation of powers is crucial to liberty. It is what our country is founded on. And it's important, as consistent with my judicial methodology, for each branch to operate within their own sphere. That means, for me, that judges can't make law. Judges shouldn't be policymakers. That's a part of our constitutional design, and it prevents our government from being too powerful and encroaching on individual liberty. JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge. I  --  I mentioned in my opening remarks that the court has played a vital role, constrained within its proper constitutional boundaries in the national process, of making America in real life what America is in text. And reflecting on your experience as a public defender, a vital role in our justice system, let's talk a little bit about the Sixth Amendment and the role that the court played in ensuring that the Sixth Amendment is real in practice in the Gideon v Wainwright decision. Can you help all those who are tuned in right now to reflect upon that decision, what it means, what it says about the role of the court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Prior to Gideon versus Wainwright, people who could not afford lawyers were not entitled to lawyers under our system. So, a person could be accused by the government of criminal behavior and would have to fend for themselves in court. They would have to make their own arguments. Someone who is not a lawyer would still be responsible for defending him or herself in front of a judge if the government brought charges. Earl Gideon was a criminal defendant from Florida, my home state, who had a handwritten petition. He complained that it wasn't fair under our constitutional scheme that protects and requires people to be tried. He said I need help. I'm not a lawyer. I can't make these arguments. I think it's important for the protection of liberty to ensure that people are able to have counsel.And that handwritten petition made its way to the Supreme Court, and the justices read it. And they determined to take his case, and in the end decided that the protections of the Sixth Amendment, the right to trial, includes the right to appointed counsel so that everybody who is accused of criminal behavior now has the right to an attorney.And that's very important. I mean, one of the things that I see  --  or saw as a trial judge is that it was crucial for our justice system to have representation from both sides. It was the only way that a judge  --  it is the only way that a judge can really make fair determinations. And in cases  --  you know, we've heard a lot about my criminal cases. In every case I'm getting, as a judge, arguments from the prosecution. I'm getting arguments from the defense counsel. I'm getting arguments or statements from probation in these criminal cases. And the work of a judge is to look at the facts and circumstances, hear the arguments of the parties, apply the law, and make a fair determination. And so, having lawyers for criminal defendants aids in that process and benefits us all in our criminal justice system. JON OSSOFF: I would just take the opportunity to note at this time, Judge Jackson, that it  --  it so happens that the Southern District of Georgia as one of just three federal districts without a federal defender's office. And I've offered legislation to establish one, and I'll be seeking support from my Republican colleagues to try to make that bipartisan to ensure there is access to counsel for defendants in my state.[*]JON OSSOFF: Let's talk a bit about the First Amendment; freedoms of speech, publication, assembly. There's a well-known Supreme Court case, Brandenburg v Ohio, which establishes a certain test to ensure that the government is constrained in any effort that may be made to punish speech. And the impulse to censorship is something that can emerge from time to time across the ideological and political spectrum, particularly in times of great controversy or in times of national security crisis. Can you please walk the committee and the broader public watching now from all across the country through that decision and how you will approach these vital protections for speech publication and assembly should you be confirmed? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Freedom of speech, publication, assembly is in the First Amendment of the Constitution. It is a core foundational protection against censorship. It is important in our constitutional scheme that people be allowed to express themselves, that ideas be exchanged; that is the groundwork for a vigorous and vital democracy. There are many tests, many cases in the Supreme Court's jurisprudence that discuss various disputes about circumstances in which the government can restrain or regulate speech. And that decision establishes to a certain extent that if there is speech that is an incitement to violence, that's one circumstance in which the government might be able to prevent it. But other than that, short of that, free speech is supposed to be allowed to happen. And there are again, various tests and circumstances that the court has applied in deciding whether the government can --  can regulate the content, place, and manner of speech, but the general principle is that our democracy is  --  thrives because the government is restrained and cannot censor its citizens. JON OSSOFF: I think in the  --  in the same spirit of banks with which I opened these questions, I also want to just take a moment and recognize the members of the press who are here. The reporters and photographers who ensure that these proceedings are truly accessible to the public. And ask you to describe your approach to press freedom. The question of prior  --  prior restraint has been litigated. A famous case in the context of the Pentagon Papers in the latter years of the Vietnam War. I know, I believe for all of us on this committee, we recognize the vital role of press freedom in ensuring the free exchange of ideas, access to truth, and debate in our democracy. How will you approach cases that implicate press freedom? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. This is another area in which there is well-established case law that supports the freedom of the press to be able to write and report. There  --  there is a general obligation of truth in terms of the press, but also a recognition that sometimes  --  sometimes there may be things that get published that aren't exactly accurate. And so the court in New York Times versus Sullivan determined a higher standard of liability for press. Things that are put out in the press have to be knowingly false. There's an actual malice test because the court was balancing the concerns about libel people claiming that they have been misrepresented in the press with the need to allow the press to do their job. The  --  the overall understanding is that press freedom again, is one of the First Amendment freedoms that undergird our democracy. JON OSSOFF: Something I just want to take a moment and observe Judge Jackson is, you know, and this is my first such proceeding. So I'm grateful to the Chairman for opening today's ceremonies at the end of the day. But something that I've studied and I'm aware of is that there's been a range over time of how willing nominees are to candidly and openly and forthrightly discuss these core matters of constitutional principle in proceedings like this one and a tendency over time to allow less and discuss less a more restrictive approach. And I want to thank you because while you have prudently and disciplined  --  in a disciplined way refrained from commenting inappropriately on potential pending case law, you have been willing to engage in a forthright and expansive discussion of these vital principles in a way that I think stands out among some recent nominees. That's not a criticism of any recent nominees. It's an observation about your performance. And I think that having an open and honest and forthright dialogue about these matters of national significance is part of the vital role that these proceedings serve. I want to turn now to the Fourth Amendment, want to discuss with you the protections against unreasonable search and seizure. We discussed how the Constitution was a renunciation of monarchies and tyranny. It establishes core civil liberties, one of which is the protection against unreasonable search and seizure. How will you approach Fourth Amendment case law and can you help those tuned in across the country, remind them of what for example the principle of a reasonable expectation of privacy means in the context of Supreme Court jurisprudence? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The Fourth Amendment is one of the amendments in the Constitution that protects individual liberty by limiting what the government can do with respect to criminal processes. It restrains the government from engaging in unreasonable searches and seizures. And the Supreme Court has developed a series of tests and ways of evaluating whether any particular act by an officer in a case qualifies as an unreasonable search or seizure. Let me just say that this is the kind of area of Supreme Court and judicial review that is very fact specific because courts, in order to stay in our appropriate role, can't make policy about police behavior writ large. Can't just sort of look out into the universe and say we have a Constitution that says unreasonable searches and seizures, so let us tell you all what that means. That's not the way that courts operate. Under Article three, courts can only hear individual cases and controversies and decide them. So every court, including the Supreme Court is looking at unreasonable search and seizures in the context of a particular dispute where someone has had something searched by an officer in their house, they've been seized under a particular set of facts, and they claim in the context of a lawsuit or in the context of defending themselves that there has been an unreasonable search or seizure. And so the court, case by case by case, looks at the facts and circumstances and decides. And I would say that this is  --  this is the kind of analysis that takes into account a number of things, but one of the things, in addition to understanding the facts and circumstances, is understanding what is meant in the Constitution by unreasonable search and seizure. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: There is case law that the Supreme Court has developed that looks at whether or not something is an unreasonable search and seizure in part by analyzing whether there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in the item in that area. Is there a reasonable expectation of privacy in your house, for example? If a police officer were to come into your house, you -- you would not be able to claim Fourth Amendment protection unless, says the Supreme Court, there was a reasonable expectation of privacy in your house. And the Supreme Court has determined whether there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, for example in your house, by looking at what areas were protected at the time of the founding when the words unreasonable searches and seizures were written into the Constitution. Lo and behold, something like your house, the court has determined, there is a reasonable expectation of privacy because that's what those terms meant back then. And so, if a police officer were to come without a warrant, the court has said, in areas where there is a reasonable expectation of privacy, that would be an unlawful search. JON OSSOFF: This is an area where the emergence of new technologies makes it likely, I believe, that should you be confirmed, you will have to consider Fourth Amendment claims in light of circumstances that couldn't have been anticipated at the time of the drafting of the constitution. And indeed, constitutional interpretation has already evolved over time to adapt to the reality of new technologies, from phone booths, a classic case in the late 1960s about whether a closed phone booth door demonstrates an expectation of privacy, to more recent case law involving geolocation data from cell phones. And I want to urge you, should you be confirmed, to remain vigilant about how the emergence of new technologies, the way that they become ubiquitous in our lives, the way that virtual spaces are increasingly akin to physical spaces, will require the court to consider very complex questions and to seek technical advice because these are technologically complex questions.What is your view on how the court should seek such technical expertise, which may be, with all due respect, beyond the training or experience of a justice or their clerk? And if, for example, one such method of seeking advice is through amici, what's the importance of understanding the provenance and origin and funding source of such briefs submitted to the court?This is a two part question. I want to restate it. The first is, again, I want to urge you, should you be confirmed, as I'm confident you will, to vigorously defend the constitutional rights of American citizens against unreasonable search and seizure in the context of new technologies. Like to hear how you approach seeking technical expertise to inform that decision-making.And then a question about the transparency of briefs filed before the court, something that Justice Scalia noted in some campaign finance case laws, that it's important for the public to know who is funding electioneering communications in the context of political campaigns. I think it's important for the court to know who is briefing them, what the motive and funding source of such briefs might be. Could you please  --  with my remaining time and then I'll yield and we'll have some more time later to discuss war powers, could you please comment on those matters? Those will be my final questions for this round. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the ways in which the court receives information, other than directly from the parties in a case, is through a practice  --  an established practice of receiving amicus briefs. Amicus is a term for friend  --  friend of the court briefs. These are people who are not parties to the case, who don't have that kind of interest in the case, but may have expertise or information or arguments that they wish the court to hear.And I think that that would be the primary mechanism by which  --  if the court were to decide to hear a case concerning a matter that involves some technical expertise, I  --  I would think that there might be amicus briefs related to the technology, for example. I have not looked at the court's rules. I would certainly want to discuss with  --  with the court's other justices the ways in which determinations are made about which amicus briefs are received and what disclosures are related to them. But the court does receive amicus briefs in cases in order to inform itself so that it can make a decision related to the issues in the case. JON OSSOFF: Thank you, Judge Jackson. Thank you for your courage and your grace, your forthrightness in answering my questions. I look forward to the opportunity to ask a few more later. And I yield, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator Ossoff. Senator Tillis? THOM TILLIS: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge Jackson, thank you for being here. I hope you got some rest last night, and congratulations. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very little, Senator, but that's all right. THOM TILLIS: Me too. But  --  but thank you for being here, and congratulations to your family and your husband, who has an impressive medical list of accomplishments that he should be proud of. I'm sure that you are too. And thank you to your family, the public servants, serving in the military, serving in law enforcement, educating our children. You're a role model family. I do want to go back  --  this morning, I ended up turning to a channel that I never watch just to see what  --  what was being said about the proceedings. I thought it was interesting that they were ridiculing some of my colleagues on this side of the aisle for bringing up the behavior of past Supreme Court hearings. This is really the appropriate venue to do it. I guess we could talk about it when we're reviewing intellectual property or something else, but contextually this is the time to do that. And I think we all have to agree that the behavior in the Kavanaugh hearing was inappropriate. I hope we never get back to it. And I hope we can all agree that many of the behavior or the positions that some of my colleagues took on the other side of the aisle with Justice Barrett was abhorrent, and we should never do it again. That's why I'm so glad that, for the most part, we've behaved in an appropriate manner here. I'm going to get to some questions if time allows that  --  that relates to some other questions that my colleagues have asked. But Judge Barrett, did I understand correctly that at a young age you won a debate competition, or was it oratory competition? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: We were  --  I was in speech and debate. It was one team, and I did original oratory as my primary event. THOM TILLIS: And did you continue your debate competition? Did you continue to do that? First question, did you continue to do debate competition? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Continue into college? THOM TILLIS: Yeah. I mean, were you doing that in school  --  in college as you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did not do it in college. No, I did it  --  I did it from middle school through high school and stopped when I graduated high school. THOM TILLIS: I did too. And  --  and I recall with that that we would get assigned a topic that wouldn't necessarily be one that we agreed with, but we had to argue it. Were  --  were you ever in a situation, or did you get to pick a topic and only argued the side that  --  that you were for? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I  --  I didn't do  --  what it sounds like you're referencing is extemporaneous speaking. THOM TILLIS: Yeah. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think I did that once in one competition. I did original oratory  -- THOM TILLIS: Ok. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Which is where I wrote my own speech. THOM TILLIS: Ok. You've  --  you've had an opportunity to debate a lot as a defense counsel, I would assume, in  --  in the court of law when you're debating a position. And the reason I ask that question is that yesterday, when Senator Kennedy was asking you about the  --  expanding the court or what we call court packing, you said I haven't really thought about it, but I hear the arguments on both sides, and I under  --  and hear the argument on both sides. So, could you briefly describe to me your perception of the arguments on both sides? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: My understanding of the argument is about whether or not to expand the court beyond the nine justices that are on the court right now, the nine seats that are there? And  -- THOM TILLIS: If you  --  if you were to view  --  I mean, right now it's nine is fine, four or more. I mean, that's really the two arguments. So, do you understand or have you heard any of the arguments for or against either side? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was  --  I'm not even sure about the four. I've just heard people talking about putting more justices on the court, expressing concerns that the court has become politicized, that the court has become unbalanced in terms of what people perceive to be views of the majority of the justices.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, I've heard arguments about rebalancing the court on that side.And then, there is the argument that many on the dais have stated about the inappropriateness of doing so, the concern that it might lead to some kind of a -- a war of every time there's a new President adding justices to the court. THOM TILLIS: They -- actually yesterday when Senator Whitehouse  --  I think it was Senator Booker who observed Senator Whitehouse's presentation, made a comment about how Rhode Island  --  New Jersey being a bit bigger would have a bigger graphic to display. I went back, I think that New Jersey is six times the size of Rhode Island by square miles. North Carolina is 36 times the size of Rhode Island. And before my friends in Texas chime in, I would  --  I would let them know that if Alaska were two states, they'd be the third largest state. So I'm a  --  decided to use the Whitehouse format for dark money so that we have a balanced understanding of the fact that our proceedings here, the aspirations for the court, there is an ecosystem out there on both sides. As a matter of fact, we had a judicial nominee who actually participated in this ecosystem. I think you could reasonably assume if they participated in that ecosystem that they probably would have been an activist judge. The  --  the point that I make here is that we've seen this ecosystem mobilized to support you. And  --  and I think, Judge Jackson, you said you haven't had any encounter with Demand Justice. I don't know if you've had any encounter with some of these that are abbreviated, or I'm sorry, either acronyms or abbreviated. So I wouldn't expect you to. It would be interesting if  --  if we could for the record determine if you have had any interactions. But with respect  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  I have not, Senator. I've never seen most of those. THOM TILLIS: That's good enough. I wouldn't expect you to to be honest sitting on the bench. But  --  but they are out there and they have a specific plan. And their specific plan  --  as a matter of fact, I was inspired by Senator Whitehouse's seat. So I went out to Demand Justice. They have a specific plan. Step one, four seats on the Supreme Court. We must add four seats on the Supreme Court to restore balance, which by their opinion is a majority with their view and their judicial philosophy. They're thrilled that President Biden has promised to appoint a commission. In fact, they're so thrilled that they want to make sure that they can influence the outside of the co  --  the  --  the commission by endorsing their four seat strategy. They want to recruit 25,000 volunteers  --  this is on their website, their strategy  --  to influence the commission's recommendation. And then they want to nuke the filibuster. 51 votes to make a decision that could ultimately be to pack the courts. This is their stated goal. They're proud of it. Senator Whitehouse was talking about how the prior President was influenced by an organization. I would  --  I would say that Senator Jackson and almost everybody that the President vetted before  --  I'm sorry, Judge Jackson  --  are on this list. So I think it's intellectually dishonest to say that the Administration, that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are not influenced by this organization. We've tracked some of the fundraising and support and reelections. They're engaged and they're influenced by it. But let me tell you what I'm really worried about with the court packing risk that we have today. We're  --  we're talking about the ultimate destruction of two institutions. Back in January, Senator Schumer laid a vote down on the floor that ultimately would have reduced the majority of 60  --  the  --  the filibuster limit of 60 to 51. He was doing it as a  --  as a way to pass a single bill, but we all know what happened when Senator Reed nuked the executive calendar for circuit court judges. It led to you only being subject to 51 votes to be confirmed. That nuked the executive calendar In January, Senator Schumer was laying the groundwork for the same thing. Now I worry that that's the destruction of the Senate institution as far as I'm concerned. I think we have to be a consensus based organization. We don't need to be a 100 member House of Representatives. And that vote happened. What disappointed me most about that vote is back when President Trump was calling on us and pressuring us to nuke the filibuster when we had control of Congress, I signed onto a letter with more than 60 members to say that I would never do that. In the face of our Pre  --  in  --  in the face of a Republican President whose policies I supported. I did that to send a very clear message: I respect this institution and I respect the court which almost certainly would have been  --  we would have had pressure from our side of the aisle to pack the court a little bit more. Now every member who was here back when we signed that letter who's on this committee changed their position and voted to potentially nuke the filibuster just two months ago. So I  --  I hope you can understand my concern about the political winds and the potential damage that it could do to the Senate and do to the Supreme Court. I think it was Federalist Paper 78 where Hamilton talked about the vulnerability or I think the feebleness. Now he was arguing I think the case for lifetime appointments. But I do think that the Supreme Court is a fragile institution. And I do believe that if we think it's politicized now, think about how it would be if we destroy the institution of the Senate so that a on  --  a strict party line partisan vote we expand the court. That's why court packing is important. And that's why we ask a question that I know you're not going to answer. But I know that Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg did. And if there's any Supreme Court Justice listening right now I wish that they would speak up because I think your institution is in peril. And accelerating it to a truly political body is only one successful nuking of the filibuster vote away in the US Senate. This is serious stuff. I was at Price Waterhouse  --  I was a partner at Price Waterhouse back during the Arthur Andersen Enron scandal. I saw about a hundred year old top tier big five consulting firm cease to exist because their reputation suffered. If we pack the court, the only thing that you all have that  --  that the Supreme Court has is its integrity and the esteem that the American people and the trust that they put into it. Packing the court could cause the Supreme Court to lose the trust of the American people. And I think if we want to expand the court, let's do it for the only valid reasons. Maybe the justices come to us and the Chief Justice come to us and say the workload too  --  is too great. The times have changed. And then convince 60 members of this body to consider it. But when you've got a partisan organization here that's putting a pipeline of people in there that they think think like them and have a judicial philosophy like them, how can any reasonable person think that this is just kind of fixing the mechanics? It's a partisan decision that even some of my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have taken the bait. So much so that they would reverse a commitment that they made with me when they signed that letter to say they would never to filibuster and then nuke it. President Biden's on that list too. Back in 1983 he gave a rousing speech in a Judiciary Committee hearing saying don't pack the court. He gave a rousing speech on the Senate floor saying, don't nuke the filibuster. But now we're in this posture to where we could destroy two institutions if we're not careful. So I actually hope that you can at some point study the issue thoroughly and understand the risks to this institution that you're likely to be confirmed to. It's serious and you could end up being there. You'll have a lifetime appointment. You could actually be there and witness its demise real time if we're allowing  --  if we allow the court to be packed. Now I want to talk a little bit about the  --  you  --  I think you were  --  you were a part of a  --  of a case in Massachusetts that some people are casting as a pro-life versus pro-choice issue. Now to be clear, I am Catholic and I am pro-life. And I am proud to have signed and ratified pro-life bills in North Carolina when I was speaker of the House that have withstood judicial scrutiny. [*]THOM TILLIS: I don't really think that case was about pro-life. I think it was about free speech. So I want to ask you a few questions about it. And maybe you could describe it to me if your memory serves you. But it seems to me that the argument that you -- you were a part of, I think that you -- you joined with a couple of others, it seemed as if the argument was because the pro-life protesters were threatening to dange -- threatening and dangerous to women, attempting to enter the clinic. I'm not necessarily saying you put those words in the brief, but they were in there, and they were hostile, noisy crowd, and the face of protesters. Now is it  --  am I correct that a part of the argument was because they were noisy, in-your-face protesters, they needed to be a little bit further away than people who were pro-choice advocates because as I understand it, I think the underlying law In Massachusetts was ultimately struck down unanimously by the Supreme Court. Is that correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The brief that you  -- THOM TILLIS: Oh, by the way I  --  I didn't expect you to respond to my riff on packing the court. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. THOM TILLIS: Just omit it out. It's a bad, bad, bad idea. But  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I understand. The brief that you are referencing was a brief that I worked on right after finishing my Supreme Court clerkship when I joined a big law firm in Massachusetts. This is 19  --  maybe 2000, at the end of my clerkship, and it is a First Amendment free speech set of arguments that the lawyers at my firm  --  I was a part of a team representing clients who wanted to make an argument about buffer zones, which at that time had not yet been litigated all  --  all the way up to the Supreme Court. THOM TILLIS: That was at a buffer zone that put pro-life and pro-choice people in the same buffer or one that argued that pro-life people were in your face and perhaps needed a bit better  --  bigger buffer than the pro-choice. I was just trying to  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. THOM TILLIS: --  understand the facts of the case. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I'm  --  I believe that it was viewpoint neutral, meaning it wasn't about what the people were saying. It was about clearing a path to allow people to enter the clinic. The laws at the time were about how far did people have to be kept back, whether they were pro-life or pro-choice, because if they were blocking the entrance  -- THOM TILLIS: Do  --  do you understand why they  --  the underlying law was ultimately deemed unconstitutional by the Supreme Court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't follow the jurisprudence at that time. It had not been. And the First Circuit I  --  this was a First Circuit brief. I don't remember what happened in the district court, but my clients wanted to argue in the First Circuit that the laws that allowed for the clearing of the path so that people could enter the clinic and have people stand back were constitutional and important. And the First Circuit agreed. I think ultimately I  --  I don't know exactly, but I think ultimately, as you say, there was some litigation that went all the way to the Supreme Court and the court had other jurisprudence about the extent to which buffer zones are constitution. THOM TILLIS: Well, it  --  it  --  it looked at  --  I'm not an attorney, I watch Law and Order from time to time. And I'm  --  I'm not going to get into a debate. But  --  but on its face, it almost looked as if there was this notion that there was bad speech and good speech. That  --  that somehow  --  and look, I'm somebody who has had protesters come to my house, get in my face, and be very nasty. Four times by land and two times by sea. I live on a lake. Okay with them doing as long as they stay off my lawn. In the last case, they didn't. But it almost felt like to me that those protesters who didn't like me needed to be a little bit further away than the protesters that maybe I would allow to be a little bit closer. May not be right, but I'll make sure that I get my facts right before this afternoon in the second round. I want to go to sentencing. I'm not going to cover any of the ground that my colleagues have. I'm sympathetic to some of it, not necessarily all of it, because I think the details are something that we don't have possession of. I'm sure we're going to talk a little bit more about that, but I  --  I want to talk more about a pattern. I know, and I was really impacted by your description of family dinners and your  --  your uncles coming in in uniforms and putting their guns up in the cupboard and having a sense of pride that  --  that you  --  you had family that served in law enforcement. There are a couple of cases  --  I'm very focused on law enforcement and backing the blue. I think that police  --  law enforcement, I talk with a lot of them, their morale is low, they feel like defund the police and some of these other efforts are already making a very difficult and dangerous job, more difficult, more dangerous. There have been a few cases where you have recommended lower sentences that even, I think, the defense attorneys have. But I'm sure that if I were you and observing you yesterday, you would probably point to some mitigating circumstances or factors that are not necessarily available to the committee as a basis for doing that. I think in one case the government recommended a 30 month sentence and the defense recommended 21 months and you gave them 18 months. And this was a third conviction for assaulting an officer. There was another one that was a lower sentence for  --  there were officer assaults and it just seemed like it went lower. But I don't want to get into those because you may have factors that  --  that you would point to that would justify the decision. I've got a question about  --  see that's at an atomic level. I mean, you're looking at the facts of the case, you're looking at the defendant, and as you've described in some of the other cases here, you made a judgment that you thought was fair and that was in bounds with your peer group. But back at the beginning of the COVID pandemic, I believe you made this statement and I'll give you time to provide context if it's out of context. But in the interest of time, I'm only going to read the most striking. You said the obvious increased risk of harm that the COVID-19 pandemic poses to individuals who have been detained in the districts, that's the District of Columbia's, correctional facilities reasonably suggests that each and every  --  and I think that means everyone, every defendant who is currently in the DC Department of Corrections, custody and who thus cannot take independent measures to control their own hygiene and distance themselves from others should be released. I checked in April of 2020, I think that's when you made the statement that there were 12 or 1,600, let's call it 1,200, I'll be conservative people in the Department of Corrections. Do I read that statement to say that you felt given the circumstances of the time they should all be released? Because that's broad, that's not looking at their individual cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, you don't read it correctly. It was not a statement. It was a line in an opinion and the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic was a really, obviously horrible and difficult time for all of us. And what was happening at the beginning in the prisons, which was part of the criminal justice system that as judges we were involved in  -- THOM TILLIS: --  let me  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah. THOM TILLIS: --  because I do not want to go over, I don't go over. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Can I just  -- THOM TILLIS: But let me  --  let me just give you a little bit more context. I've actually written letters to  --  to the Department of Justice encouraging the release of nonviolent offenders in North Carolina at a federal correctional facility. I've also supported early release programs, I voted and supported the first step back. I, as Speaker of the House, was the first Speaker in probably two decades that actually did the Justice Reinvestment Act, early release of nonviolent prisoners. But how can I not read this to say that perhaps they should be released irrespective of the  --  the crime for which they've been charged? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, if you read two more sentences down, that is precisely what I focus on. This is a case, United States versus Wiggins, where I was setting up my analysis as to why I would not be releasing Mr. Wiggins in this case. He was arguing essentially what I said in that statement.  [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: He was arguing that the circumstances of COVID-19, which at that point was rampant  in the prisons. We had not had a vaccine. There were very difficult circumstances for prisoners who could not be separated from each other in the context of our jails. And as I say at the beginning of that opinion, at that point COVID was ravaging the jail. And the question for courts under the statute that Congress has enacted for compassionate release was whether COVID-19, a pandemic in the jail, was an extraordinary and exceptional circumstance -- or extraordinary and compelling circumstance that should warrant release. What I said in that statement that you read was it would seem as though something like a deadly pandemic rampant in the jails would justify releasing everyone, but I go on to say in that very opinion Congress has indicated that we have to take each case individually. We have to look at the harm to the community that might be caused by the release of individual people. We can't just release everybody, I said in that opinion -- THOM TILLIS: Okay. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so  -- THOM TILLIS: I wanted to give you  --  and I'm sorry to interrupt you, but I'm  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's all right. THOM TILLIS: On  --  on 4 minutes. But I  --  I feel like  --  I also got  --  I had  --  my staff provided me this morning in very, very small type refit  --  recidivism and federal sentencing outcomes. You know, I've said  --  I'm on record as saying that I want people out. I want them  --  have them an opportunity to reenter society, become productive members. And I've got a track record for ratifying bills to that effect and supporting similar measures since I've been here in the Senate. I'm going to continue to work on it. But tell me why the  --  the numbers that I'm looking here, we have recidivism rate, the most recent one that I have before me, and I'd be happy to share  --  share it. I'll ask with  --  to have this submitted to the record. But I think an eight year look-back says that 49 percent of the people incarcerated are re-arrested within eight years. If you take a look at the  --  the types that are  --  are most likely to be reoffending, it's firearms offenders, robbery offenders, violent offenders re-offended at a higher rate than nonviolent offenders.And so, if I look at this and I  --  I look at your philosophy with respect  --  and it's admirable. I said that the content of your character would be demonstrated this week in my opening statement, and it has been. And one of the things that are first among them are your compassion and your belief that people can redeem themselves.But if you look at some of the cases that our  --  my colleagues have brought up, and if you look at even  --  even with the context that you provided on the last statement about the  --  the Department of Corrections statement in Wiggins, can you understand how some of us may think that your  --  your compassion could lead to bad results based on the numbers that we have here with recidivism, that Congress may need to work more on that to make sure that we get it right? Can  --  can you understand how somebody who  --  from our side of the aisle could see that maybe there is some pattern to give the benefit of the doubt to someone who has been incarcerated in some cases with very serious crimes? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I don't recall saying anything about compassion in the way that you're describing it. But  --  but I THOM TILLIS: No, no, no. I'm just saying that if I  --  if I take a look at your  --  your responses to some of my colleagues' questions and your statements to some of the  --  to some of the defendants, it seems as though you're a very kind person, and that there is at least a level of empathy that enters into your treatment of a defendant that some could view as a  --  maybe beyond what some of us would be comfortable with with respect to administering justice. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for letting me clarify. The statements that I made about my practices as a trial judge, which I'm no longer a trial judge, but were intended to explain how trial judges operate and how they impose sentences within the framework that Congress has provided. The statute that applies to us tells us to look at all of the various factors that Congress has set forward, including the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history of the character  --  and characteristics of the defendant, and it tells us that we should be imposing a sentence sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. Congress also tells us that one of the purposes of punishment is rehabilitation. My attempts to communicate directly with defendants is about public safety, because most of the people who are incarcerated via the federal system and even via the state system will come out, will be a part of our communities again. And so, it is to our entire benefit, as Congress has recognized, to ensure that people who come out stop committing crimes. And so, what I convey, or did when I was a trial judge, as I sentenced people to very lengthy periods of incarceration was you are getting your day in court. You are able to say what you want to say, but you have to sit here and listen to my reading into the record the victim statements in this case. You have to go away understanding that I am imposing consequences for your decision, your decision to engage in criminal behavior. And the reason why I did that, I have said, is because I recognized as a defender that there were lots of people in our system who, instead of taking responsibility for what they had done and then ultimately understanding the harm and potentially not doing it again, instead of that, those people were bitter, they were angry, they were feeling victimized because they didn't get a chance to say what they wanted to say, because nobody explained to them that drug crimes are really serious crimes.Nobody said to them, do you understand that there are children who will never have normal lives because you sold crack to their parents and now they're in a vortex of addiction. Do you understand that, Mr. Defendant? I was the one in my sentencing practices who explained those things in an interest of furthering Congress's direction that we were supposed to be sentencing people so that they can ultimately be rehabilitated to the benefit of society as a whole. THOM TILLIS: I  --  I appreciate that, Judge Jackson. I  --  I just still note that virtually half of those people, statistically speaking, that you gave that speech to within eight years were back in prison, and sometime  --  in some cases for more serious offenses than the first incarceration. Thank you, Mr. Chair. DICK DURBIN: Thanks, Senator, for that line of questioning. And I noted that you joined a letter with Senator Grassley and myself in March of 2020 at the earliest stages of this talking about release under these similar circumstances. And of course, we all said at the same time low risk inmates would be considered, but  -- THOM TILLIS: Only low risk inmates. DICK DURBIN: Yes. THOM TILLIS: Yep. DICK DURBIN: And I wanted to make that note for the record.We're going to start the second round of questions, 20 minutes each, and I'll  --  I'll kick it off. This is an unusual document, this Constitution of ours, which has taken up so much time in the hearing, the conversation about it, and it is really at the core of public service.I don't know that there's a place that you can take a job at the federal level in any branch of government without taking an oath to defend this document. I don't know about other countries and the oaths that might be required. But we even, within the Constitution, spell out the oath to be taken by the president of the United States, and it's to uphold and defend this document.And there's great debate about just what this document means in today's context. We understand the wisdom, the inherent wisdom of the document, and the fact that we're still here some 230 years later with the design of a government that has endured longer than virtually any other democracy, which of course speaks to the wisdom of the founding fathers and their plan for this nation.[*]DICK DURBIN: But we also understand, taking an honest  --  honest look at it, you barely get into this document Article 1, Section II, then you run into a problem because in Article one, section two, the article that relates to Congress, they talk about who will be counted for apportionment among the states. And there is that awful reference to 3/5 of all of the persons, which though the document never mentions the word slavery or slaves, what was being spelled out here by the founding fathers was how are we going to count these slaves. And for apportionment purposes they were to be counted as 3/5 of a person, which is a horrible notion by any standard. But the wise founding fathers included it trying to deal with the reality of their day. I hear debates back and forth of originalists, textualists, and others and you've been asked as often as any nominee what your thought is. You've talked about staying your own way in judiciary and methodology and like, but I'd like to explore for just a moment without asking you to get in any particular fact pattern, the reality of a couple of things. First, when the Bill of Rights was written, the First Amendment to it made certain to guarantee freedom of press. Freedom of the press in 1790 was of course referring to a piece of paper, a newspaper, and saying that there would be freedom to engage in that process in this democracy of America. Now, that freedom of press is referring to this and things have changed an awful lot. We have a circumstance now where people no longer have just a handful of television networks or known publications, Washington Post, New York Times, and such, but turn for their sources of information to places like Facebook and Twitter and beyond. And we have a real serious question about what is a publication in America. What does it take to be a publication and be press? Is my blog, that I publish tomorrow, the press? Guaranteed with a constitutional right that I have a right to publish it as I wish, say what I want to say with certain boundaries. And I guess my question to you as we look at this, is how do you move from the language of 1789, 1790 to the reality of 21st century and make sure it's relevant. If more people are relying on Facebook and Twitter, for example, for information then they are common sources of television and newspapers. How do we rationalize that they can say, Facebook and Twitter, to a former President of the United States, you can't publish here? You're not going to be allowed to do it. And they've done that. So how do you reconcile the conflict of the changing times, the dramatic changes in technology, what the founding fathers envisioned, and what we face today? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The challenges that you identify are the types of things that the Supreme Court is now dealing with. We have a foundational document that has text and it has principles, it establishes freedoms and foundational important concepts that are intended to govern us, and that we are bound by as a  --  as a society. There's modern technologies, as you say, that have not  --  that  --  that the framers, the founders could not have imagined the cell phone and all the other things that we now rely upon. And as I mentioned earlier, the Supreme Court and every court deals with individual cases, disputes about issues, and when the court gets an issue that requires constitutional interpretation, it looks at the facts and circumstances of the particular case and the text and principles of the Constitution in light of the times in which they were written and analogizes to present day. So the Supreme Court for example, has considered the cell phone issue with respect to the Constitutional principle of unreasonable searches and seizures, which is a protection from government intrusion that the framers called an unreasonable search. The text unreasonable search is not  --  does not have an inherent definition. What the Supreme Court has done is looked back at the time of the founding to determine what kinds of intrusion would have been covered when those words were written into the Constitution. And to the extent that the  --  at the time of the founding, those words covered things like police officer intruding into your home and looking into your papers and affairs. Then, the Supreme Court analogizes that circumstance to the modern day circumstance of a cell phone, which now is in all respects, says the court, like rifling through your pur  --  pur  --  papers and affairs. So it's a process of understanding what the core foundational principles are in the Constitution as captured by the text as originally intended and then applying those principles to modern day. DICK DURBIN: I'll just give you two illustrations of my thinking on this and my frustration, or at least an understanding of the challenge, I would say, let's put it that way. Senator Feinstein and I joined in legislation several years ago to talk about confidential  --  confidentiality of sources for news entities and whether or not a person could  --  a reporter could be compelled to disclose those sources. The effort really drew some of the best and brightest in the news business to come testify for the committee. The effort failed and faltered over what is a publication, who is a publisher, who is in the business of dispensing news. Does it involve money has to pass between them for this to be an official publication? Or, can I just put up on my blog what I wish and  --  and resist any efforts to do  --  to discover my sources? That was one of the serious issues that we faced. We also took a look  --  I take a look at where this is going in terms of the future and  --  and our entities that we rely on for news so often. And I'm going to leave it at that because I think you've addressed the general and don't want to get into more specifics, nor should you. But when people pledge that, you know, they are originalists, we're sticking with the original words, you better have your mind open to the reality that this world is changing and changed, and many of those principles are sound today, but the challenges of interpreting them with the reality of today's technology is  --  is a challenge, a very difficult one which you will face in the court. I'm going to try to set an example here. We have 20 minutes and I'm going to try to yield back some part of it. I see that Senator Cornyn is here and I'm glad he is because I'm going to address an issue which he raised yesterday and again this morning and I wanted to do it while he was physically present, so that when he gets his turn, he can address it, I'm sure  --  sure he will. Yesterday, Senator Graham said that you had gone too far in calling the government quote :a war criminal in pursuing charges against a terrorist". Later Senator Cornyn asked Judge Jackson, I quote, "you referred to the Secretary of Defense and President of the United States as war criminals. Why would you do something like that?" As I noted yesterday and repeat this morning, these charges don't hold up. CNN fact check said quote, "both Graham and Cornyn left out important context. Specifically neither mentioned the Jackson's allegation of war crimes was about torture. Also, Jackson didn't explicitly use the phrase war criminal". The New York Times noted, that the allegation quote "is a distortion and lacks context". The New York Times went on to say, "Judge Jackson did not specifically call the former President, Defense Secretary war criminals. She was one of several lawyers in 2005 signing for essentially boilerplate habeas corpus petitions on behalf of detainees at Guantanamo that claimed the US government had tortured the man and that such acts constitute war crimes". That's in quotes. The petitions each name Mr. Bush and Mr. Rumsfeld along with two senior military officers who oversaw the Guantanamo detention operation in their official capacities as respondents. [*]DICK DURBIN: Washington Post noted, and I quote "one key thing to note as law professor Stephen Vladeck does is that Bush and Rumsfeld are named in petitions because they have to be declared procedural hurdles. Indeed those petitions later named Barack Obama after the Administration changed. Another is that they are named in their official capacities, not because of actions they took -- personally took as individuals. And they continued. But the larger point is that Jackdon -- Jackson was acting as a detainee's lawyer in her role as public defender, and one of the underpinnings of the American justice system that is even the most reviled alleged criminals have the right to a vigorous defense. Would you like to comment on that statement that I just made? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would just say that public defenders don't choose their clients and yet they have to provide vigorous advocacy. That's the duty of a lawyer. And as a judge now, I see the importance of having lawyers who make arguments, who make allegations in the context of a habeas petition, especially early in the process of the response to the horrible ta -- attacks of 9/11. Lawyers were helping the courts to assess the permissible extent of executive authority by making arguments and we were assigned as public defenders. We had very little information because of the confidentiality or classified nature of a lot of the record. And as an appellate lawyer it was my obligation to file habeas petitions on behalf of my clients. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Judge. I'm gonna try to set an example by yielding back about seven minutes of my time. I invite my colleagues to follow that example if they wish. Senator Grassley you're next. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. Before I start I'd like to make a brief point. Yesterday, Senator Durbin referenced Congress's effort to stop child pornography and the exploitation of minors. I've worked on this issue for decades. In 1983, I supported the Protection of Children Against Sexual Exploitation Act. In 2012, I sent a letter to the Sentencing Commission while Judge Jackson was Vice Chair. In the letter I encouraged the Sentencing Commission not to lower sentences for child pornography. I said that quote, "It would be a  --  a disservice to the American people to have the commission issue a report that advocates for the reduction in sentencing for a class of criminals who cause profound and lasting damage to their victims," end of quote. I'd like to have that put in the record. DICK DURBIN: --  Without objection. Yesterday you referred to your record of decisions as the best thing to look at when explaining and evaluating your nomination. But you also said that you haven't had enough cases involving constitutional law to develop a judicial philosophy. CHUCK GRASSLEY: If you haven't had to develop a philosophy for deciding cases yet what else do you think would be helpful for us to look at? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, respectfully Senator, I do have a philosophy. The philosophy is my methodology. It is a philosophy that I have developed from practice. Unlike some judges who come to appellate work from academia and who have some overarching theory of the law. I approach cases from experience, from practice, and consistent with my constitutional obligations. So my philosophy is one in which I look at cases impartially, consistent with my independence as a judicial officer. I understand my limited role in the constitutional scheme and therefore take very seriously all of the constraints on the exercise of my authority that exist in our system. What that means is that at the beginning of every case I am setting aside my personal views. I'm  -- CHUCK GRASSLEY: --  That's the three steps you gave us  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yes, sir. CHUCK GRASSLEY: So you don't have to go into that. Let me go on then. Should the Supreme Court overrule a precedent when it is clear to the justices that the precedent was wrongly decided? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Stare decisis, which is the principle that the Supreme Court uses at the outset, it's the sort of background rule of judicial maintenance of precedence in order to have predictability, stability in the law is the kind of principle that the court begins with when it is asked to overrule or revisit a precedent. And the court has developed certain factors that it looks at before it actually undertakes to reverse a precedent. One of those factors is the view that the precedent it's reconsidering is wrong. But that's not the only factor. The court also determines in addition to whether or not the pre  --  the prior precedent was egregiously wrong the court has said  --  the court looks at whether there's been reliance on that prior precedent, whether the precedent is workable or has proven workable over time, whether the cases in the area of the precedent have shifted such that the precedent itself is no longer on firm foundation, and whether there have been either new facts or a new understanding of the facts that give rise to a need to revisit the precedent. So it's not just a look at whether or not it's wrong. And it's important that the court take into account all of those factors because stare decisis, meaning letting the precedent stand, is a very important pillar of the rule of law. CHUCK GRASSLEY: When is it appropriate for a judge to impose a sentence enhancement under the guidelines? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The federal sentencing guidelines are crafted to assist courts in making sentencing determinations within the broad range that Congress prescribes for cases for  --  for crimes. So in the typical case a defendant is convicted of some crime in the federal system. They're usually very serious crimes. And Congress will say, Judge, you can give that person a sentence anywhere between zero and 20 years, for example. The sentencing guidelines are designed to set out a series of factors that judges should be looking at when they decide what they're going to sentence that particular person to. And those factors will be things like if this is a violent crime does the person have a weapon? If this is a violent crime was there any injury? And so the judge is looking at these facts, in many cases horrible facts, and calculating the guidelines based on what we call enhancements. Each one of those different characteristics or conditions is an enhancement. So you ask when is it important to  --  to  -- CHUCK GRASSLEY: --  Appropriate  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  When it's appropriate. Well, the judge  --  judge has to calculate the guidelines in every case. That's how we start the process. But under the statutes, in addition to calculating the guidelines with all of those enhancements, the way our system now works is you determine what the guideline range of punishment is going to be, and then Congress says you look at a series of other factors in addition to the guideline range. And at the end of the day, the judges in the system now are choosing sentences based on both the consideration of the guidelines and also the consideration of the statutory factors that Congress has put forward. [*]CHUCK GRASSLEY: Have you ever declined to impose an enhanced sentence on a defendant because you disagreed with the enhancement as a policy matter? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Yes, and the reason is because of Supreme Court case law concerning the way in which the guideline system operates. The Supreme Court has determined in a case we discussed yesterday that the guidelines are no longer binding on judges, meaning the guidelines you calculate, but you don't have to stay in the guideline range anymore. That was the Supreme Court's Booker case. In -- and I can't remember if it's in that case or in subsequent case law, but the Supreme Court has also made clear that, when you are calculating the guideline range in the new system that we're in right now, judges are free, they --  the Supreme Court has said, to decide in particular cases whether as a "policy matter" they disagree with a particular enhancement. That is the state of the law. That is what the Supreme Court has said judges are permitted to do in cases. And so, I have in certain cases  --  given the way in which the guidelines are operating, the disparities that are created in cases, I have at times identified various enhancements that I have disagreed with as a policy matter because the Supreme Court has said that that's the authority of a sentencing judge in our system. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Are nationwide injunctions constitutional? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator  -- CHUCK GRASSLEY: You  --  you've them. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for letting me address that circumstance. The reason why I paused is because what  --  what I have issued is not technically a nationwide injunction. People call  --  call it that. But in a particular set of cases, administrative agency cases that are brought under the Administrative Procedure Act, these are challenges to agency actions like agency rules that they have promulgated.And if the challenge is to the procedures that the agency undertook to create the rule, the statute that applies, the Administrative Procedure Act, tells the court that if you agree with the plaintiff that the agency rule is faulty procedurally, the remedy in the statute is to invalidate the rule. That's what Congress tells judges to do. Now, technically that's not a nationwide injunction. That is invalidating a rule that the agency has enacted. It may have nationwide effects because the agency may have implemented its rule nationwide. But what the court is doing is not reaching out and touching everyone in the country. The court is directing the government that has promulgated that rule that the rule is invalid. And that's what the statute tells us we have to do in those cases.That's different than a nationwide injunction, because a nationwide injunction would be a situation in which we're not dealing with the rule, we're not dealing with the Administrative Procedure Act. We're dealing with a particular case in which something has happened between the plaintiff and the defendant, and the court says, based on what happened in this case, I'm going to tell everybody in the country that you can't  --  the defendant, you can't operate in this way anymore. I'm going to find on the basis of this particular case, and I'm going to enjoin everyone in the country not to do that anymore. That's a nationwide injunction, which is not what I've done in I think the cases that you're talking about. CHUCK GRASSLEY: How can the judiciary address concerns about foreign shop  --  forum shopping, given the rise of nationwide injunctions? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, forum shopping is  --  is a concern that arises when litigants seek to go to different places in the country where they think that they may get a better result. And it's something that Congress can address because Congress has the power to determine various aspects of judicial process. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Explain the political question doctrine, and then what standards would you apply to determine whether a claim before you implicates a political question? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, the political question doctrine is a doctrine that relates to the jurisdiction of the court. As I mentioned, the courts are in a particular branch of government, the judicial branch, that is limited in its power. The courts can't make policy. They can't reach out into the world and decide that certain things are good or bad and then address them. They have to wait for cases to come and decide them. And when a case comes, it has to be presenting a question of law for the court to answer it. If a person comes to the court and they ask the court to answer something that is properly in the province of Congress, if they ask a political question, then the court has to say, I'm sorry, that's not my role.So, I had, for example, a case that involved Yemeni citizens who  --  I'm trying to get the facts exactly right, but they had relatives. They were  --  I think they were resident in the United States and they had relatives in Yemen, a war torn area. This is a few  --  few years ago. And they came to the court, me, asking if I could direct the administration to extract their relatives from Yemen. That  --  they wanted me to order the executive branch to send in troops and get their relatives out, because it was obviously dangerous for their relatives to be in that country.And what I said in that circumstance is, essentially, I don't have jurisdiction to do that, because what you're asking me to do is a political question. The  --  the question of when and where troops can be sent and who can be extracted from foreign governments belongs with the executive branch, and so you have to ask them. And so, I said I have no jurisdiction. That's the political question doctrine, and it's well-established in  --  in our law. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yesterday, in response to a question from Senator Durbin, you said that a judge  --  as a judge, you are "trying in every case to stay in your lane." That's the same time you gave us the three steps you go through as you work yourself through a case. You also described the text of law as a constraint on your authority, but in several cases I'll list, Make the Road New York AFL-CIO versus Trump, Watervale Marine Companies and others, the DC Circuit reversed your decision or criticized your reasoning for failing to file a clear and unambiguous text. Why didn't the clear text of the laws constrain your authority in these cases? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. You mentioned three cases. Certainly with respect to the second one, the DC Circuit didn't say that the text was clear. And in fact, that's what happens in cases, that judges at the trial level do their best to make interpretations. In that case, it involved a channeling provision. This is AFGE versus Trump. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It involved a provision, a statute, that was designed to channel the judicial authority into an agency. And I interpreted the statute and I thought the arguments that were being made, the claims that were being made were not ones that Congress had intended to channel. And I went through the analysis and I explained my reasoning as to why I thought I still had jurisdiction, and I went on to address the merits, which is the duty of the judge if they determine they do have jurisdiction. The DC Circuit disagreed. They wrote an opinion that interpreted the statute differently with respect to those claims. But it was a case of first impression as to what those claims meant and whether they were supposed to be channeled or not. And that happens. The district judges do their best and sometimes the court of Appeals and the Supreme Court haven't spoken to the issue and the parties disagree. In make the road, I explained that what I was attempting to do in light of Congress's enactments not only the particular immigration provision, but also the Administrative Procedure Act was reconcile the statutes of Congress, which is something that the courts also are supposed to do, that there are statutory interpretation canons that make clear that courts are supposed to understand that Congress intends for its statutes to work together. And to the extent that you are interpreting and the claim is made that allows you to do that, that's the sort of way in which interpretation is done. I can go through my actual analysis. I did it yesterday as we talked, but there was a good faith disagreement between me and the Court of Appeals which gets to decide as to what the language meant and whether or not Congress actually intended to exclude the APA using that language under those circumstances. DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much. Senator Leahy. PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you, Chair. And welcome back Judge Jackson. I  --  I know yesterday was a grueling day of questions. I commend you for your poise, your endurance, your thoughtful answers. I felt privileged to be here four hours of that and you had even more hours. But I want you to know the reaction in my own state of Vermont. I've gotten all kinds of emails and calls from friends across the political spectrum. They're all been praising you, and they said they realize that a lot of the questions that were lobbed at you had nothing at all to do with your qualities as being  --  being on the Supreme Court, but were some members unfortunately aiming for what a sound bite that they might be able to put on a political website where it now is. For example, we heard some overheated claims yesterday that your representation of Guantanamo detainees somehow signaled your policy preference with how the United States has dealt with those detainees. Every single member of this committee, especially those of us who have been assigned as counsel in cases, should know better than to conflate a nominee's past representation with their policy positions or to argue that a nominee espoused their client's viewpoint simply by choosing to represent them. So your policy views aside, can you reiterate why it's so important for our courts to have the benefit of the best possible legal representation on both sides of any case and especially in cases where we are in uncharted legal and constitutional waters? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. Thank you, Senator. So I've been a judge for a --  almost a decade, and what I've learned is that as part of my duty to render decisions consistent with my judicial oath, in support of our Constitution and the rule of law, I need to consider all of the arguments related to the dispute that is being brought in my courtroom. I need to hear from, not only the parties who are prosecuting a case, for example a crime, but also from the defense. And some of these crimes are terrible crimes. Our Constitution is designed to ensure that the government affords due process to people who are being accused of crimes. And one might think even  --  it's even more important in  --  in a way in a case in which someone is so reviled. It's kind of like the First Amendment. It's a protection for  --  for unpopular views. It's needed when there's a chance that the government will suppress or, you know, do something that's untoward. And so in the criminal justice system, we have many, many amendments that are designed to make sure that unpopular people, people who are accused of doing terrible things are still treated fairly by the government. And that's a limitation on government power, which is the  --  which is the framework of our Constitution. It is about limiting government overreach. And so in the criminal justice system, you can imagine, and the framers imagined a world in which the government would use its authority to deprive people of their liberty. To  --  to throw people in jail, to lock  --  lock them up and throw away the key, to not give people the opportunity to make arguments about their freedom. That would be about a real exercise of government power, government overreach. And so the framers said, what we're going to do is we are going to put in our foundational documents a protection for people that the government is accusing of crime. And that's not to say that the people are innocent. That's not to say that they haven't done terrible things. What it's about is ensuring that the government does what is required in order to ensure all of our liberty. It protects all of us because there might be someone who  --  who is innocent. And the government  --  if the government is able to just do whatever it wants in criminal process, we are all at risk. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, and I think we've all seen cases where that happened. I mentioned to you yesterday that I spent nearly a decade as a prosecutor. Especially when I had serious cases, I wanted the best defense attorney possible on the other side. I won a case that if  --  if I won, it usually went up on appeal automatically if it carried a heavy penalty. I wanted to be the court  --  the appellate court to look at and say, okay, there were not errors of counsel on either side. And  --  but I also, as a strong proponent of our Constitution, I think what you're saying is something I totally agree with. We have to have  --  we have to have the individuals' rights protected. It doesn't mean the defense counsel is in favor of a murder, rape, or armed robbery, but the rights have to be protected. Let me tell you about another area. I've authored and I've long championed the bipartisan John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. I think it would help curtail the growing wave of voter suppression sweeping across our country. Again, something we don't have to worry about in Vermont, but unfortunately do in other states. I'm passionate about this legislation. I've always believed that our democracy is stronger when we expand not shrink the ranks of our citizens who have fully participated. I believe our democracy grows stronger with your historic nomination and your presence before us today. And I've told you privately how my family members feel about that. Why is it important for our democracy's institutions, courts, or others to reflect the rich diversity of our nation's citizenry? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things we've been talking about is the difference between the judicial branch and the other branches of government. We have three branches in our federal system. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things we've been talking about is the difference between the judicial branch and the other branches of government. We have three branches in our federal system and the legislative branch has certain powers and it can do certain things to ensure that its prerogatives are achieved. And the executive branch has the power of might. They -- the -- the President controls the military. The judicial branch, its force in our system is the protection of the rule of law which can only be done by essentially the consent of the governed. It can only be done if people in our society believe, decide, and agree that they're going to follow what it is that courts decide. And so one of the reasons why having a di -- diverse judicial branch is important is because it lends and bolsters public confidence in our system. We have a diverse society in the United States. There are people from all over who come to this great nation and make their lives. And when people see that the judicial branch is comprised of a variety of people who are  --  have taken the oath to protect the Constitution and who are doing their best to interpret the laws consistent with that oath, it lends confidence that the rulings that the judge  --  that  --  that the court is handing down are fair and just, that everything has been considered, that no one is being excluded because of a characteristic like race or gender or anything else. And that's  --  that's important. I would also say that  --  that it's important from the standpoint of role modeling. That I have been so touched by the numbers of people who've reached out to me in this period of time to say how much it has meant to their daughters, to their sons, to the next generation that I've been appointed to  --  nominated and  --  and hopefully confirmed. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, I  --  I agree with you. I've certainly seen that within my own family. You know we  --  we do have areas where we agree on things on this committee, Judge. Senators Grassley and Senator Cornyn, myself, and others believe in transparency as part of our democracy. We've done this with the Freedom of Information Act where we've updated it. A number of years Senator Cornyn and I have been the key sponsors of  --  of legislation joined by Senator Grassley and Senator Durbin and others to improve the Freedom of Information Act. You've talked about the detailed opinions you've rendered to try to do the same thing. I think it's safe to say you believe transparency is central to the duties of a judge. Do you intend to carry that attitude when  --  and you will. And you will become a member of the US Supreme Court. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The value of public confidence, which I was just discussing, I think is enhanced when the public understands the reasons that a judge renders his or her ruling. One of my mentors used to say people think the judicial branch is so secretive. But in fact the judicial branch is the only branch that actually has to tell everyone, that actually has to write their opinions and explain why it is that they did what they did. And so I tried  --  I've tried in the nearly ten years that I've been on  --  on the bench to make ru  -- my rulings transparent. To explain all of the inputs that I have considered with respect to the case, to lay out the law as I see it in interpreting what  --  what Congress, for example, has done in  --  in  --  with respect to a particular case and what legal provisions that I think are relevant to the dispute. And then to explain my analysis. Why am I granting this motion or denying this claim? And my hope is that it will help people to be confident in my reasoning. And even if they disagree with it, they will understand what it is that I think. And I think that's important for public confidence in promoting the rule of law. PATRICK LEAHY: Well, you know, you had talked about your clerking for Justice Breyer and how it opened up doors of opportunity. I remember so well our conversation in my office in the President pro tempore's office talking before you  --  these heritage began. You told me what you thought it'd mean to your parents and your family, your husband, your daughters, your parents who have been here throughout this. And what it would have meant to your grandparents. You said you were the lucky first inheritor of Dr. King's civil rights legacy. I keep a daily journal; I wrote that down. I just  --  it means a lot. So let me do a sort of open ended question. You've patiently answer our questions this week. I told you the reaction in Vermont, but disappointment in some that were obviously political. I heard that from both Republicans and Democrats because they're thinking it should be your legal thoughts in the Supreme Court. So I'd like to give you an opportunity to speak directly to the American people, including my little state of Vermont. Is there anything you want to convey to them about what kind of Supreme Court Justice you would be if and when you're confirmed? It's all  --  it's all yours, your honor. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, first let me just address my comments to you in your office, which is something that I've said in speeches because it speaks to who I am and what I value. My parents grew up in Florida under lawful segregation. And what that means is that when they were coming through middle school and high school they were not allowed to go to school with white students. This is in the era before and right after the Brown versus the Board decision. There was lawful segregation in places in this country. And it was after that time that Dr. King made his famous comments that people mention about having a dream where people can be judged by the  --  not by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. And I then was born in 1970, and the contrast between my reality growing up in Florida and my parents' reality growing up in Florida, like night and day in terms of the opportunities that were available to me that weren't available to Judge Motley who is one of my role models in  --  in the law. And so what my being here I think is about at some level is about the  --  the progress that we've made in this country in a very short period of time I would say. It seems like a long time. But one generation we've gone from  --  from the reality of my parents upbringing to the reality of mine. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I do consider myself having been born in 1970 to be the first generation to benefit from the civil rights movement, from the legacy of all of the work of so many people that went into changing the laws in this country so that people like me  could have an opportunity to be sitting here before you today. What I would hope to bring to the Supreme Court is very similar to what 115 other justices have brought, which is their life experiences. Their perspectives and mine include being a trial judge, being an appellate judge, being a public defender, being a member of the Sentencing Commission, in addition to my being a Black woman, a lucky inheritor of the Civil Rights dream. And in my capacity as a justice, I would do what I've done for the past decade, which is to rule from a position of neutrality, to look carefully at the facts and the circumstances of every case without any agendas, without any attempt to push the law in one direction or the other, to look only at the facts and the circumstances, interpreting the law consistent with the Constitution and precedents, and to render rulings that I believe and that I hope that people would have confidence in. PATRICK LEAHY: Thank you. And Chair Durbin, I've had the opportunity to be here -- the first justice I got to vote on was John Paul Stevens, nominated by President Gerald Ford, proud to vote for him. And it's a long arc, Judge Jackson, but I am so proud of your answers and I appreciate it, and yield back. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Leahy. Let's take a break for about 15 minutes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Judge. [*]DICK DURBIN: The questioning will resume. Senator Graham. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Sorry. Good morning, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I want to comment on the -- the last exchange. And Judge thi -- this is not of your making. So it's really not about  --  about you. But Representative Green, who's a fine man, came up and said that he thought the exchange between you and Senator Leahy at the end about the arc of time and how far we've come as a nation was powerful. I agree. It was powerful. And I guess here's my point I'm trying to make to the American people, to my Democratic colleagues. I wish you had that same attitude when an African-American conservative is appointed to high office in the judiciary. So what happened with Janice Rogers Brown? In 2003 she was an African-American nominee for the disi  --  DC district court, 54 years old. A little bit older than you, but pretty close. She was a daughter and granddaughter of sharecroppers, a childhood in Alabama under Jim Crow. She was a single mother, a member of the California Supreme Court. Instead of celebrating how far we've come, my Democratic colleagues filibustered her ascension to the DC Circuit Court. Cause it was well known on our side that we were very much considering her to be the first African-American woman on the Supreme Court. So rather than this wonderful exchange  --  which was wonderful  --  Representative Green, where were you and others when there was a wholesale assault on her nomination? Nowhere to be found. The filibuster was used for two years to stop her nomination, and we eventually did the gang of 14 of which I was a part so that she could make it through after two years of waiting. This is what the current President said when he was in the Senate, Joe Biden. Asking about her, Janice Rogers Brown, being on the Supreme Court. I can assure you that would be a very, very, very difficult fight and she probably would be filibustered. That's what he said about an African-American conservative nominee by President Bush who had served five years on the California Supreme Court. We're not going to live in America like that any longer. To my Democratic colleagues, if you're a person of color, a woman supported by liberals it's pretty easy sailing. But if you're Miguel Estrada, Janice Rogers Brown, Amy Coney Barrett, on and on and on, your life gets turned upside down. You had nothing to do with that. I just make this observation that when you come up to me and talk about how moving the exchange was, I agree. And I just want to remind you, there was somebody else of color, a woman of color, that was picked for the DC circuit, one of the highest courts in the land, that did not meet the same fate. And those days should be over. Do you believe illegal immigrants should be allowed to vote Judge Jackson? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Under our laws you have to be a citizen of the United States in order to vote. LINDSEY GRAHAM: So the answer would be no. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's not consistent with our laws. So the answer is no. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Why did they do that in New York? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of the circumstances you're  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  Ok. All right. Well that's a good answer. The answer is no. Can an unborn child feel pain at 20 weeks in the birthing process? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't know. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you aware of the fact that anesthesia's provided to the unborn child at that time period if there's an operation to save the baby's life because they can in fact feel pain? Are you aware of that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of that. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, that may come before you one day, so just keep an open mind. That's the only thing that I ask you to do. You said just a bit ago and that you apply the law and the facts and call them as you see them. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  Ok. And you look at the statute as the way it's written and you try to apply it in it's plain meaning. Is that correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Have you heard of a case called Make the Road versus McAleenan? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Make the Road New York? Yes. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yeah, Ok. Make the Road in New York. Who are they? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Make the Road New York is a nonprofit that represents various individuals in the sort of immigration law field. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. They're a nonprofit advocacy group for im  --  immigration issues. Did you know they receive large donations from the Arabella network and from George Soros' Open Society Foundation Network? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. Well they did. Now in that case, what was the issue? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The issue in that case was a challenge to a change in administration policy concerning expedited removal, which is a policy that Congress enacted  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mm-hm  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In order to expedite certain removals in the immigration system. Ordinarily before expedited removal  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Asylum cases do not fall into this category, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Trust me on that cause the statute says it doesn't. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If a person who could otherwise be subject to expedited removal makes and has a credible fear of torture in their country, they can be determed  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: And can they make that claim  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: They can be determined  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: To qualify for regular removal rather than  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Expedited removal. LINDSEY GRAHAM: So expedited removal is a creature of Congress, folks. And if you've been here two years or less, the statute  --  the  --  the statute. I'm sorry, the statute. The statute would allow the Administration in office to have expedited removal, avoiding a lot of the  --  the hurdles that would exist otherwise for people here two years or less. So in the Obama, even Bush years, they did not look at it in terms of applying it to everybody. [*]LINDSEY GRAHAM:  Some people coming back here got expedi  --  expedited removal. The Trump administration decided to use the authority given to it by Congress to remove all eligible cases two years or less under the expedited removal statute. Is that a fair summary? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, I would say -- say it differently. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, say it differently. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: All right. The statue that you put up indicates that Congress is giving the department  --  it says the attorney general, but now it's the department. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. Right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The ability to determine what category of aliens  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: If you've  --  two years or less. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah, but  --  but  --  but importantly, the authority was  --  it was not Congress saying two years or less. What Congress said is you, agency, have the authority to determine what category of persons between who  --  who have been here between zero and 24 months should be. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Which is two years, yeah. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, but what  --  forgive me, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: So  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm just  --  what I'm trying to explain is that the authority given to the agency was to determine what length time LINDSEY GRAHAM: They had discretion make that  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What  --  what length of time. It was not the authority to deport everyone who's been here for 24 months. It was the authority to determine what length of time a person has to be here in order to be subjected to expedited removal. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Here's what the statute said. The attorney general, which is actually the DHS secretary, may apply clauses one and two of this subparagraph to any and all aliens described in subclass 2 as designated by the attorney general, well, actually DHS. Such designation shall be in the sole and unreviewable discretion of the attorney general and may be modified at any time.Now, I've been in this business for quite a while. What the Trump administration did was to use the discretion given to it by statute in a way different than prior administrations. This advocacy group, the Arabella supported advocacy group, tried to strike it down. You ruled for them. Here's what the DC Circuit Court said about your ruling. There could hardly be a more definitive expression of Congressional intent to leave the decision about the scope of expanded removal within statutory bounds to the secretary's independent judge  --  judgment. The forceful phrase sole and unreviewable discretion buys exceptional terms. Such designation shall be in the sole and unreviewable discretion of the attorney general and may be modified at any time.To those of us in the law writing business, I don't know how you could tell a judge more clearly that the administration, the agency in question, has discretion to do certain things within the statute. So, this is an example to me, and you may not agree, where the plain language of the statute was completely wiped out by you.You reached a conclusion because you disagreed with the Trump administration. And the DC Circuit Court of Appeals said, as I've quoted just a minute ago, there could hardly be a more definitive expression of congressional intent to leave the decision about the scope of expedited removal within the statutory bounds to the secretary's independent judgment. That, to me, is Exhibit A of activism.Let's go back to the child pornography cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, would you allow me to  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes, please. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. The statute and the circumstances that you reference are accurate insofar as that is what the statute says. It's not all of it. It doesn't describe the designation process that I was trying to articulate, and it doesn't address the fact that Congress has another statute that is presumptively applied in agency cases to tell agencies how to exercise discretion.There is also DC Circuit case law that says that, in addition to having that procedural statute be presumptive, even very clear designations of authority to an agency may still be subject to Congress's other  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Judge  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Directions regarding how to  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Um-hmm. Judge  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Exercise  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The discretion. So  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: That argument fell on deaf ears. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Understood. That  --  that's our appellate process. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, but  --  but, wait, wait a minute. I've got other things I want to talk about. You given an explanation, but it didn't work. The DC Circuit Court said there could hardly be a more definitive expression of congressional intent. This is good as it gets. There's no way to write a statute saying discretion lies in an agency. It's sole. It's non-reviewable. So, you're not convincing me that this was anything  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: That this is anything other than acts  --  activism, and we can talk about it all day long. But I'd  --  I agree with the DC Court. This, to me is an example, Exhibit A, of a judge ignoring limitations placed in the law by Congress to get a result they wanted.Child pornography; I have no doubt that you find child pornography disgusting as the rest of America. You're a mother. You seem to be a very nice person. Are you aware of how many images are out there on the Internet involving children in sexually compromising situations? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of the numbers, but I've seen the images in my role  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: And they are disgusting, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As judge. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me tell you the numbers. In 2021, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children cyber tip line received 29.3 million reports of a parent-child sexual exploitation containing 85 million images, videos, and other files. That's in 2021. It's up. In 2019, it was less. So, there's an epidemic of this on the Internet that, if you go out on the Internet, there are millions of pictures of kids being abused. When it comes to sentencing child pornography possession cases, do you routine  --  routinely discount the fact that a computer was used? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator, for allowing me to address this concern. The guidelines related to child pornography  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Um-hmm. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Were drafted at a time in which a computer was not used for the majority, if not almost all, of these kinds of horrible crimes. The guidelines have enhancements in them. LINDSEY GRAHAM: In two areas that you said you disagree. What are those two areas? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: At the time that the guidelines were drafted, it was a  --  an aggravating factor, a substantial aggravating factor to use a computer in order to distribute and disseminate the images because the ordinary crime was not committed by computer. So, the baseline  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Would you now agree with me that computers are sort of the venue of choice for child pornographer people? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Ok. So, here's my point. If you believe, as I do, the computer has created a bigger demand. There are more photos out there because of the Internet, more websites are exposing this garbage. Wouldn't you want to deter people from going down that road? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, this crime is among the most difficult, most  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: No, answer my question. Wouldn't you want to deter people from going down the road of using the computer that allows these people to have access to millions of photos because of the technology? I want those people deterred. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, if you're listening to my voice today and you're on a computer looking at child pornography and you get caught, I hope your en  --  your sentence is enhanced, because the  --  the computer and the Internet is feeding the beast here, that all these images out there are going to be more over time because people use computers. Now, didn't you also say that the number of images should not be considered as a sentence enhancement? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, with respect to the computer, one of the most effective deterrents is one that I imposed in every case and that judges across the country impose in every case, which is substantial, substantial supervision. Any of these defendants  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: You're  --  wait, wait a minute, Judge. You think it is a bigger deterrent to take somebody who's on a computer looking at sexual images of children in the most disgusting way is to supervise their computer habits versus putting them in jail? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No Senator, I didn't say versus. LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's exactly what you said. [*]LINDSEY GRAHAM: I think the best way to deter people from getting on a computer and viewing thousands and hundreds and over time maybe millions the population as the whole of children being exploited and abused every time somebody clicks on is to put their ass in jail, not supervise their computer usage. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I wasn't talking about verses -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: You just said you thought it was a deterrent to supervise them. I don't think it's a deterrent. I think the deterrent is putting them in jail -- DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her respond? LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  the sentencing have a deterrent component. DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her respond? LINDSEY GRAHAM: Yes. Does sentencing have a deterrent component? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. Deterrence is one of the purposes of punishment. And Congress has directed courts to consider various means of achieving deterrence. One of them, as you said is incarceration. Another, as I tried to mention, was substantial periods of supervision once the person  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: So, if I could  --  may ask you, in your view is more of a deterrent to have somebody substantially supervised in terms of their computer use, who's looking at child pornography than it is to put them in jail? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not saying it's more or less  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: That's exactly what you're saying. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I  --  what I'd like to point out is that if we're going to  --  If  --  let  --  let me say it this way, Congress has authorized courts to use a number of different means to achieve the purposes of punishment  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: And one of them is an enhanced punishment by using a computer. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The enhancement with respect to using a computer relates to the penalty in terms of incarceration. LINDSEY GRAHAM: And you would choose not to apply that in these cases. You've said that  --  I read you the quote, but you've decided not to apply the use of computers and enhancement. You've also said you're not going to hold the number of images that the person has looked at as a sentencing enhancement factor. Is that true? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator, it's not the number of images that the person has looked at because we don't have that information. It is  --  it is the  --  the number of images that they've either received or distributed  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, you don't  --  we don't know if they looked at them, but you're not going to hold it against them that they received 10,000 images versus 100. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's not what I've said, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, here's what you said. I have decided to apply my general policy disagreement with respect to those enhancements, at least that is the computers and the number of images. Folks, what she is saying, the reason she's always below the recommendation, I think, is because she doesn't use the enhancements available to her. She takes them off the table. And I think that's a big mistake, Judge. I think that every federal judge out there should make it harder for somebody to go on a computer and view this filth. That if you use that venue, which is the venue of choice for all these child pornography cases, that you use it against them. I think the more you download, like drugs, the more you have, the more you should go to jail. You've made a conscious decision to disregard those two enhancement sentencing factors. And I think that is a wrong way to go in terms of deterrent. To me, putting somebody in jail for using a computer is more of a deterrent than supervising their activity of watching the computer. That's just a difference that we have. I know I'm out of time. And listen, I  --  you've lived an incredible life, but here's one thing that won't happen to you as we wrap this up. How would you feel that if I'd had a letter from somebody accusing you of something a crime or misconduct for weeks, and I give it to Senator Durbin just before this hearing is over and not allow you to comment on the accusation? How would you feel about that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not sure  --  I don't understand the context of the question. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, let me  --  did you watch the Kavanaugh hearings? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, sir. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Are you familiar what happened in the Kavanaugh hearings? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Generally. DICK DURBIN: Senator, your time is  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, please, Mr. Chairman. So the be honest  --  is a minute and 47 seconds. She filibustered every question I had and she has a right to give an answer, but I'm trying to make a point. In 20 minutes. You were here for Kavanaugh, if she's confused about what happened. Some people on the other side had an accusation against Judge Kavanaugh that during high school he sexually assaulted somebody. And the rest is history. That was known to the people on the other side and never revealed during the meetings they had with Judge Kavanaugh. It was literally ambushed. He was ambushed. How would you feel if we did that to you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've appreciated the kindness that each of you has shown me, to see me in your offices, to talk with me about my approach  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: But my question is what if during our 15 minute exchange  -- it was very pleasant. You're a very nice person. You have a lot to be proud of. I would never do that to you. If I had some information that sketchy at best that somehow you've done something wrong, I promise you just from human decency I would share it with you. I would not disclose it at the last minute of the last day of the hearing. And I've already given it to a newspaper so the whole country can read about it before you ever said a word. DICK DURBIN: Senator, she's had nothing to do with the Kava  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: No. But I'm asking her about  -- DICK DURBIN: You won't even let her finish her response. LINDSEY GRAHAM: --  how she may feel about what ya'll did. DICK DURBIN: Could we have order? Senator, your time is expired and I'm going to give her an opportunity to finally complete an answer. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So if I could  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Just answer the question. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have any comment on what procedures took place in this body regarding what  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: What'd you think about the Kavanaugh  -- DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you let her finish? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I'd like to answer is your points about my sentencings in child pornography cases. The point of the guidelines is to assist judges in determining what punishment to provide in cases. And they are horrible cases, but the idea is that between the range of punishment that Congress has prescribed, judges are supposed to be providing proportional punishment based on what a person has done. The  --  the sentencing scheme doesn't place everybody at the same level. The point of judging and the guidelines is to look at what has happened in a case, compare defendants to each other in terms of what they've done, and give proportional penalty  --  penalties based  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: Mr. Chairman  --  this is non  --  she  --  she has said, Mr. Chairman, she does not use sentence enhancements in the area of somebody using a computer for everybody. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Can I explain why sir? DICK DURBIN: I'm going to give the witness an opportunity to respond to you, Senator. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Finally. Why? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: At the time that the guidelines were created for child pornography, this crime was primarily being committed by people who were literally mailing one, two, five, 10, 100 photos at a time  -- LINDSEY GRAHAM: How is it being committed now? DICK DURBIN: [Crosstalk] complete her answer? LINDSEY GRAHAM: Go ahead. Go ahead. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a result, the Commission determined in the guidelines that it was a substantial aggravating factor if the facts of the case demonstrated that someone had been distributing hundreds of images because what that meant was over this long, maybe it was a long period of time, they had collected one photo at a time. They had amassed it. They had potentially mailed one at a time, and that showed really aggravated, terrible conduct. I'm not saying as a baseline it's not terrible, it's all terrible. But what we're doing is we're differentiating among defendants. So in a world in which the mail is used for the purpose of distribution, it really matters whether the person has distributed one or five or a thousand. And so the guideline says, you know what, we are going to treat a person who's distributed a thousand a lot worse because that shows that this person is really engaged in this really horrible behavior. In comes the Internet, on the Internet, with one click, you can receive, you can distribute tens of thousands, you can be doing this for 15 minutes and all of a sudden you are looking at 30, 40, 50 years in prison. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Good. Good. Absolutely good.[Crosstalk] DICK DURBIN: Allow her to finish please. LINDSEY GRAHAM: I hope you go to jail for 50 years if you're on the Internet trolling for images of children in sexual exploitation, say, so you don't think that's a bad thing. I think that's a horrible thing. DICK DURBIN: That's not what the witness said, and she should be allowed to answer this question once and for all. Senator. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, all I'm trying to explain is that our sentencing system, the system that Congress has created, the system that the Sentencing Commission is the steward of is a rational one. It's a system that is designed to help judges do justice in these terrible circumstances by eliminating unwarranted disparities, by ensuring that the most serious defendants get the longest periods of time. And when modes of commission of the crime change such that, in two seconds, someone can receive or distribute thousands of images, that's no longer a -- and this is what the commission found in their studies, an indicator of a person who, relative to other people, has committed this crime in a more aggravated way. LINDSEY GRAHAM: Well, all I -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And what we're trying to do is be rational in our dealing with some of the most horrible kinds of behavior. This is what our justice system is about. It's about judges making determinations in meting out penalties to people who have done terrible things. LINDSEY GRAHAM: It is not rational to take the venue of choice of child pornographers, the computer, that have 85 million images on it and not consider that feeding the beast. We're trying to get people to stop this crap. So, when you troll on the Internet and you pull down thousands of images of children from the Internet, I want you to stop that. I want people to go to jail who do that because you're feeding the beast. We have a bill here, the EARN IT Act, that would allow the victims who are on the Internet over and over again to sue the  --  the media companies that provide these images. We have a  --  fundamental differences of how you deter crime. I think the best way you deter crime when it comes to child pornography is you lower the boom on anybody who goes on the Internet and pulls out these images for their pleasure. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, every person in all of these charts and documents I sent to jail because I know how serious this crime is. Every person, I discussed the harm of these terrible, terrible images to the victims who are portrayed in them. I talked about what this crime does to the children who are being abused in these photos. And on the other side of their terms of imprisonment, I ensured that they were facing lengthy periods of supervision and restrictions on their computer use, so they could not do this sort of thing again. That's what Congress has required of judges, and that's what I did in every case. LINDSEY GRAHAM: You always were under the recommendation of the prosecutor, many times the parole. And to be honest with you, Judge, a 32 year old man who sent an image of his own ten year old daughter, you substantially reduced the guide  --  not only the guidelines, but the recommendation. And all I can say is that your view of how to deter child pornography is not my view. I think you're doing it wrong, and every judge who does what you're doing is making it easier for the children to be exploited. If you're on a computer right now looking at a kid in a sexually compromising situation and you get caught, I hope nobody gives you a break because you used the computer. DICK DURBIN: The conduct that's been described is reprehensible, and I think everyone in this room agrees. And the fact of the matter is that I'm co-sponsor of your bill, the EARN IT Act, and I believe that we should be doing our job here. But part of our job, we have failed in responding to the changing circumstances that face this crime. What has it been, 15 or 16 years? She is currently not an outlier in sentencing. 70% of the federal judges face the same dilemma, and wonder why Congress has failed to act and when it will act. LINDSEY GRAHAM: This is our fault? DICK DURBIN: Part of  --  partially it is, Senator. To be honest with you, it is. We have to upgrade these guidelines and decide whether we're going to stick with the Supreme Court decision that they're not mandatory. Senator Feinstein? DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to compliment the witness. You've been answering, I think, close to 15 hours worth of questions, and I know how difficult this is and hard it is. But I just want you to say, in this Senator's  --  know that in this Senator's eyes you've handled it very, very well. So  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you, and I'll move on to my questions. Congress has recognized how important it is for crime victims to participate in the legal process. And one example is the Crime Victims Rights Act, which I authored with Senator Jon Kyl in 2004. That law provides certain rights for victims at critical stages of the legal process, the right to be notified, to be present, to be heard, among others.And I understand that in your eight years as a district court judge, you would carefully consider victim impact statements when imposing criminal sentences. Could you tell us a little bit about this and how you considered crime victims in making your sentencing decisions as a judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you say, the law provides for victims to have an opportunity to address the judge, to address the court, to explain the harms that happen as a result of criminal behavior. And in the time that I was a trial judge, I found it to be a very important part of our criminal justice process, because my sentencings were about handing down consequences for the behavior that defendants had engaged in and making sure that the defendants who received those consequences understood that they were getting those consequences because of the harm that they had caused. And so, what I felt was important for promoting the purposes of punishment, which is what Congress has required of judges to do, is to ensure that the harms were made clear to the defendant in every case.So, I had for example, a case  --  a case involving robbery. There were two  --  it was a  --  a single defendant who committed two robberies, one in April and one in September, of the same small pharmacy in DuPont Circle, which is not  --  not far from here. It's a small independent pharmacy selling pharmaceuticals. And this person decided that he was going to rob the pharmacy of their oxycodone and other kinds of prescription drugs for sale. That's a sort of standard scenario that we see in the federal system, but what was so particularly egregious in this case is that this defendant was so bold in his robberies. He came in in April with a gun. He held the employees hostage, essentially, forcing them to open the safe with the drugs in it at gunpoint, stole the drugs, not masked, not hiding his identity. And this is pre-COVID, so we're not talking about having to have a mask. He was a robber, plain and simple, with no fear of people identifying him.And then in the period between April and September, he would come back to the pharmacy. He would loiter outside on the street. This is according to the victims. They would see him looking in the window. Once or twice he came inside, looking like he was going to buy something and staring them down. And they knew who he was, and they called the police. And they weren't able to, you know, apprehend him because he hadn't really done anything at that point.And the people who worked in the pharmacy were terrified. And they were terrified by that behavior, the menacing nature of it. By the time we get to September, he actually comes in. And they think maybe this is another time when he's just loitering, but no, he pulls out a gun. He hops over the counter. He assaults one of the people who are working there and steals the drugs again. And that time, they were able to call the police in enough time for them to come and apprehend him. So, at his trial  --  excuse me, he did not try. He didn't go to trial. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: You're the judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm the judge. He pled guilty to this behavior, which was well documented. There was no defense that it wasn't him. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: But the guidelines in the case and the statutes that applied said, because he used the gun, he was supposed to get something like seven years. And I used the victim statements to, first of all, explain to him how he had terrorized the people. Their statement said thing -- one -- one woman said I can't work at the pharmacy anymore because I am so fearful that this guy will come back. It's changed my whole life. It was a whole set of really horrible circumstances that I read to him at his sentencing so that he can understand what he'd actually done, and then I sentenced him above the requirement of the law because I thought it was warranted to make clear to him that this was a terrible, terrible thing that he had done to these people. So, the victim statements were really important, because they explained to me and to him the consequences of his behavior beyond just how many drugs he stole or the fact that he use a --  used a gun. They were the real life circumstances that resulted from his behavior, and it was important for him to understand that. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I  --  I've listened to most all of this testimony, which I think now you've gone on for over 15 hours. And I just want to say that I think you have a stamina and a very good brain, and a real sense of empathy has been communicated to me in these 15 hours. And I want you to know that.One of the things that I'm concerned about is that the public perception of the Supreme Court has turned increasingly negative over the last few years. A recent Pew Research survey found that 44% of adults have an unfavorable view of the Supreme Court. Less than three years ago, that number was 30% of adult  --  adults that held that view. And I understand that, as a judge on the DC bench, you have frequently accepted invitations to speak at public events in the hopes of giving the public more information about the judicial process and more con  --  confidence in the outcome. So, here's the question. Why do you think there has been a decline in the public's perception of the court? And if you are confirmed, how would you strive to improve the public's confidence in the court and its decisions? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I  --  I think that public confidence in the court is very important. It is  --  it's crucial to the rule of law that the public believe in the judicial process and therefore choose to accept the rulings of the courts, not just the Supreme Court, but all  --  all of the courts. It's part of the way our process works.And I think that I have taken that to mean, in terms of my role as a judge, that outreach to the public to explain what it is that we do to inspire, hopefully, law school students and high school students, young lawyers in  --  in law firms and elsewhere to think about careers in the judicial branch or think about careers in law, as one of the ways that I have attempted to try to shore up public confidence. And if I'm confirmed, I would plan to continue as best as I can to  --  to do that kind of thing because, as you say, it  --  it's very important for the public to understand the work of the court and to follow  --  follow its pronouncements concerning the law. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Earlier, you  --  when you and I spoke in my office, we discussed some of the people who have mentored you throughout your career, and one of those was Judge Patti Saris. You served as a law clerk for her on the Massachusetts District Court, I believe, early in your career. And you've spoken publicly about the role she has played as a mentor in your legal career. You have described her as, "a consensus builder, a good listener, a careful speaker, the essence of judicial temperament." So, would you share with all of the members here more about how Judge Saris's approach to judging and her mentorship have shaped you and your career? If you can give some of the specifics  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I think everybody would be interested. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As I reflect on her mentorship and also the mentorship of my other two judges, it's very interesting because I think I learned maybe different things from each of them. Judge Saris, who was my first clerkship, you're  --  you're correct, she's  --  serves on the District Court of Massachusetts, which is the trial level court.I learned how to look at the facts in a case from Judge Saris. That's part of what the trial court level does. We, as trial judges, develop the record in a case, take testimony, have trials. And she is extraordinary at developing a record and making sure that all of the relevant facts are adduced from the witnesses and considered in the context of her trial and  --  and record responsibilities. And so, that, I think, is something that I learned from her in terms of the law. And her warmth and care for her law clerks meant that she has been a lifelong mentor to me. And ironically, she became the chair of the Sentencing Commission after I had been on the Sentencing Commission, so we worked together later in  --  in my career. So, I often use that story to tell young people, you know, you never know what's going to happen. Someone who you worked for at some point might be your colleague down the line. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, let me  --  just one more. You've handled a large number of cases during your career, both as an advocate and a judge. As an advocate, you've worked on a very wide variety of cases, from work for corporate clients during your time in private practice to your work for low income clients during your service as a federal public defender. And during your nine years as a federal judge, you've written nearly 600 opinions. I think that's really quite a sterling record, and I imagine that some of the cases have really stuck with you. And so, I would like you, if you can, to talk a little bit about some of the cases, maybe one or two, that you've had that have made a deep impression and have really enabled you to progress as you have. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, as you say, I have handled a lot of cases in my time, nearly decade on the bench. And  --  and you learn something in almost every case, in some respect, if you're doing your job right and you're looking into all of the issues. I think there might be  --  I'd mention one from sort of a few years into my service as a trial judge. I handled a case, Yah Kai versus Napper, and the case involved trademark infringement. And you would ordinarily think that trademark infringement charges are dry and technical. And  --  and what I learned from this case is that, even  --  even areas of the law that you might think apply only to businesses in  --  impact real people at times.So, this case involved a small community, a cultural community, of people who believe in vegan lifestyles. They're  --  they call themselves the African Hebrew Israelites, but it's not a religious community. It's a cultural community around healthy living. And they have created a restaurant and a series of restaurants here in the Washington DC area with menus involving really, I'm told, terrific vegan foods.And in this community, there was a member who was the one who created the recipes and who was responsible for the restaurant. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The whole community had other aspects to it. He ended up falling out with the community and the dispute involved his actions essentially taking over the restaurant and reopening it by himself using the same name. The restaurant was called Everlasting Life, which was a important phrase for this community. And he essentially ejected the other members because he was the leaseholder or he had signed the lease on behalf of the community. And he kicked them out for a day and then he reopened the restaurant using the same name. And so the question was under the Lanham Act, which is the statute for trademark violations. The question is whether there is a potential for confusion in -- in that sort of circumstance. But ordinarily -- I see Senator Coons nodding -- ordinarily, when you have a trademark infringement, you're talking about two different businesses who have very similar products. And the question is, you know, are they similar enough to cause confusion. Because the idea of the law is that people should be able to have products that are identified with them and you shouldn't be confused. And in this case, we had a bench trial about it, but it was pretty clear. I was the fact finder as the judge. It was pretty clear, that when you opened the same business, with the same name, using the same recipes and food, that you have created this kind of problem that is a trademark violation. But what was so interesting to me about the case, in addition to the fact that I got to be the fact finder, it was a bench trial, was that we had witnesses come in who testified about their  --  the circumstances. This was a very small community and they all knew each other, and the testimony about what it meant to them to have one of their members ejected in this way and then have him turn on them was very, very moving in the courtroom. So even though we were talking about this kind of arcane area of the law, it was real circumstances that were happening. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Well, stop for a minute. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: I think you're a very important addition to the court. And what I'm trying to fathom out from the hearing is, what kind of judge will she be? How will we look at her in five or six years? And so what I really want to ascertain is what kind of a judge you will be, what will be the principles you hold dear, and how will you function in this capacity? If you could just answer that one question I've been waiting for  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: About 15 hours. [Laughter] I'd appreciate it. Thank you. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, I  --  I would hope to be the kind of judge that I have been during this last decade. I have been the kind of judge who understands that it's my responsibility to rule neutrally, to not have any agenda when I'm looking at a case/ I've been the kind of judge who understands that facts matter, facts like the ones that I was just describing, and that it's important for a judge to take into account and be able to understand the arguments of all of the different parties and participants. And I  --  I've been the kind of judge who takes my responsibility to not be a policymaker, to try to understand and ascertain the will of Congress if it's the statute or to  --  to  --  to hew to my own  --  I've been saying stay in my lane, to not exert my authority beyond what the Constitution requires when I'm interpreting and applying the law. I  --  I think I've been the kind of judge who lives up to the oath in terms of being fair and impartial, ruling without fear or favor, and ruling consistent with  --  with Article three. DIANNE FEINSTEIN: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Feinstein. Senator Cornyn. JOHN CORNYN: Good afternoon, Judge. I understand. I'm the last one maybe before lunch. So if your blood sugar is getting a low, you can think about having a little break. But just because the Chairman keeps bringing this topic up, let me just ask you one question. When you accuse somebody of a crime, are you calling them a criminal? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, Senator, I haven't accused anybody of a crime. JOHN CORNYN: That's not my question. When  --  when in common understanding and in plain English, if you accuse someone of a crime, are you accusing them of being a criminal? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  it depends on the context. It depends on what else you say about them. It depends on the circumstances. MIKE LEE: It depends on the circumstances. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. MIKE LEE: So you put this in the cate  --  same category as defining what a biological woman is? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I'm  -- MIKE LEE: You're really not sure. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't say I wasn't sure. I said it depends on  -- MIKE LEE: So, you are sure. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I said it depends on the circumstances that  --  that you're positing as to whether or not you're calling someone a criminal. JOHN CORNYN: I just don't think that's credible, Judge. Let me ask you another question. You talked about the public confidence in the courts and our institutions, which I agree are very, very important that the public has confidence in our  --  in our judiciary. Would you agree with me that to the extent that people perceive that judges unelected, lifetime tenure judges are making policy pronouncements or political decisions, that it undermines public confidence? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. JOHN CORNYN: Thank you. Yesterday, we talked a little bit about precedent. And I know Senator Feinstein, as she does in these hearings, talked about super precedent and in particular Roe versus Wade. And I want to talk a little bit about that. But first, let me just ask you, do you think there's any good reason for the Supreme Court not to overrule a previous decision when they've concluded that that decision was wrong? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I  --  again, it's hard for me to answer that question in the abstract. It  --  what I'll say is that the Supreme Court has laid out factors beyond just the precedent being wrong as a reason to overturn it. JOHN CORNYN: Well, we talked a little bit about this yesterday. The Supreme Court revisited the issue of separate but equal, which was the law  --  the constitutional interpretation of the Supreme Court under Plessy versus Ferguson and overruled that precedent because it concluded it was wrong. Right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I haven't looked carefully at the whether  --  all of the different factors that the Supreme Court now uses to overturn were discussed in the opinion. But now that the Supreme Court's precedent is to overturn on the basis of a number of different factors and not just whether or not it's wrong. JOHN CORNYN: So are you suggesting that the Supreme Court could not or would not overrule a precedent that it determined was wrongly decided? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I'm suggesting that the Supreme Court's caselaw indicates that it looks at multiple factors. JOHN CORNYN: No, I understand you go through the stare decisis analysis, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: But if it's wrong, that's one of the factors that you consider, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. But it's not the only one. JOHN CORNYN: So are you suggesting that there may be circumstances under which the court determines its previous decision is wrong, but it will not overrule it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The fact that there are multiple factors indicates that the court looks at more than rather or not it's wrong. JOHN CORNYN: Ok. So the fact  --  so you would say if I'm interpreting you correctly, that if they  --  the court concludes its previous decision is wrong, it won't necessarily overrule that, it applies a multipoint analysis. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I think that's accurate. JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Back when Roe versus Wade was decided in 1973, generally speaking the  --  the court said that the states may not limit access to abortion pre.-viability, but post-viability there could be some restriction on the right to abortion. Is that generally the  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a general matter, yes. JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Thank you. Ok. Well, and then I think it's since 1973, the question of viability has risen again.  [*]JOHN CORNYN: What that actually means, because now viability was around 28 weeks that is the fetus could live outside the womb. But today, because of advances in medical science, the fetus can live outside the womb after about 23 weeks. Is that your understanding? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I haven't studied this, so I -- I don't know the -- the  --  a number of weeks in the way that you're  -- JOHN CORNYN: Ok. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Saying. JOHN CORNYN: Well, let's  --  let's talk a little bit about viability, the line that was drawn for pre-viability and post-viability analysis by the courts. What does viability mean when it comes to an unborn child, in your understanding? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I hesitate to speculate. I don't  --  I know that it is a point in time that the court has identified in terms of when  --  the standards that apply to regulation of the right. JOHN CORNYN: Justice Brennan, at a later point in his career on the Supreme Court, admitted that the viability line was an arbitrary line. Do you agree with  --  agree with him? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not able to comment on viability. There is a  --  a case pending in the Supreme Court right now concerning the issues of  -- JOHN CORNYN: I'm asking you about previous decisions, but I  --  I hear you. No one suggests that a 20 week old fetus can live independently outside the mother's womb, do they? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I don't know. JOHN CORNYN: I mean, you need  --  the child will need to be fed or sheltered and all the other essentials to sustain human life. So, there's no suggestion that after 20 weeks that a child can be  --  live independently, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm  --  I'm not a biologist. I haven't studied this. I don't know. But  -- JOHN CORNYN: You don't know whether an  --  an unborn child could live outside the womb at 20 weeks gestation? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What I know is that the Supreme Court has tests and standards that it's applied when it evaluates regulation of the right of a woman to terminate their pregnancy. They have a  --  the court has announced that there is a right to terminate up to the point of viability, subject to the framework in Roe and Casey. And there is a pending case right now  -- JOHN CORNYN: Right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is addressing these issues. JOHN CORNYN: The Constitution doesn't mention the word abortion, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's correct. JOHN CORNYN: Just like it doesn't mention the word marriage, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. JOHN CORNYN: And so, as you and I discussed perhaps ad nauseum yesterday when we were talking about substantive due process, this is one of those unenumerated rights, that the court has created court-made doctrine or law in creating a constitutional right even though it's not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution itself, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The court has interpreted the due process clause of the 14th amendment to include  -- JOHN CORNYN: Right. We talked about substantive due process yesterday, and that's  --  that's what this is, right? The Supreme Court cases that deal with the right of abortion is a result of substantive due process analysis like you and I talked about yesterday. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Ok. In the  --  you remember  --  when you were confirmed for the Court of Appeals, in that process there was  --  we had a hearing and then we sent you questions for the record, what we call QFRs around here. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: And one of those, question number ten, was does the Constitution protect rights that are not expressly enumerated in the Constitution? As part of your answer, you said  --  you mentioned Roe versus Wade and Planned Parenthood versus Casey. And you've said this, and I'll quote, "They articulate a limited right to terminate a pregnancy." What is the limitation that you understand that was pronounced in Roe versus Wade and Casey when it comes to a right to terminate and abortion? What are the limitations under current law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Under current law, as I understand it, there are limitations insofar as there can be regulation of that right pre-viability, unless the regulation imposes an undue burden on the exercise of the right. And there can be regulation after viability as  --  as long as there is exception for the health  --  the health and I think maybe life of the mother. So, it's  --  the limitations are about whether and to what extent the government can regulate the right. JOHN CORNYN: Is it your understanding under the current precedent of the Supreme Court that there is a right to abortion up to and including the time of delivery of the child? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't  --  I don't know, actually. I mean, I  --  the Supreme Court in every case is looking at individual regulations of the government related to  --  related to individual rights. And I am not aware of the court having made a pronouncement about whether or not regulation can come  --  can extend all the way up until birth. I'm just not aware of that. And that  --  it's because the court is looking at individual cases and making its rulings in the context of individual cases and not making sort of pronouncements in general. JOHN CORNYN: So, you are suggesting that, in some individual case, the right to abortion could extend through the entire pregnancy up until the time the child is delivered. No, Senator, I'm suggesting that I'm not aware of any case that's handled the issue. You  --  what  --  you told us that you think that  --  you believe Roe versus Wade and Casey or precedents. And we talked a little bit about some of the questions, about whether it's a super precedent and the like. Are you familiar with the Supreme Court's decision in the Heller case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am. JOHN CORNYN: And that was a decision by the United States Supreme Court that recognized the individual right to keep and bear arms under the Second Amendment, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Is that a precedent of the court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is. JOHN CORNYN: And you would respect that precedent? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. All precedents of the Supreme Court have to be respected. JOHN CORNYN: Is it as  --  is it  --  is it equivalent in terms of its precedents to Roe versus Wade, or would you evaluate it differently? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'm not aware of any ranking or grading of precedents. All precedents of the Supreme Court are entitled to respect on an equal basis. JOHN CORNYN: I  --  I agree with you. That's why it kind of blows my mind when people talk about super precedents, as if somehow one precedent was different in terms of its significance or priority in  --  under the Constitution than others. In the short period of time I have remaining, let me just revisit with you some of the questions we talked about yesterday with regarding  --  with regard to free exercise of religion. And of course, that's recognized explicitly under the United States Constitution, the First Amendment, correct? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Ok. Are you familiar with the cases that have been litigated before the Supreme Court of the United States involving the Little Sisters of the Poor with regard to the Affordable Care Act's mandate on contraception coverage? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Now, the Little Sisters of the Poor are a benevolent group of nuns. I think there are about 300 of them that take care of elderly and infirm individuals. And of course, as a matter of their religious beliefs, as documented in the court's opinions, they don't believe in either contraception or abortion. Do you agree with that?[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe that was described in the case that you're talking about. JOHN CORNYN: I think that's right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Yeah. And so when the Affordable Care Act mandated that every health insurance policy contain coverage for contraception or chemically induced abortions, they objected and said that this violated their conscience and their free exercise of religion rights under the First Amendment, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I believe so. Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Well after the -- after the Obama administration during the Trump administration, the Trump administration expanded the regulations to allow not only churches, but also religious organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor, a waiver from that contraception and an abortion  --  abortion inducing drug mandate. Do you recall that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: Have you  --  are you familiar with the fact that President Biden  --  excuse me, President Biden has said he would restore the previous regulation and  --  that was promulgated under the Obama administration and exclude organizations like the Little Sisters of the Poor from that waiver potential for abortion drugs or contraception coverage. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I am not aware of that, Senator. JOHN CORNYN: Well, I guess what  --  what all this boils down to, you know, Congress passed a bill called the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which tried to make sure that people sincerely held religious beliefs, could be accommodated under their First Amendment rights as opposed to Congress mandating things that would violate their conscience and violate their religious beliefs. Do you agree with me that it's important to accommodate the sincerely held religious beliefs of all Americans when it comes to legislation that the Congress may pass? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Religious freedom is a core foundational constitutional right. It's  --  it's in the First Amendment of the Constitution and reflects the founding fathers' understanding of this country as being one that is based on, in large part, the idea of pluralism the idea that people can come and have sincerely held religious beliefs and practice them without persecution. That's part of the foundational  --  foundation  --  foundation of our  --  of our government and  --  and the amendment that you're discussing. And as a result, their  --  that right is protected in  --  in many ways. You mentioned the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. JOHN CORNYN: Right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Congress has enacted a statute that when it comes to federal regulation, if there's a substantial burden placed on religion, then the strict scrutiny standard applies. JOHN CORNYN: I agree. I have one minute. So I have one more question. I agree with what you just said. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN CORNYN: So since I have asked this question or made this point of some of your predecessors who sat in the same chair and expressed my concern about some of the court's establishment law  --  establishment jurisprudence, I want to  --  I don't want to leave you out of that concern. When I was attorney general of Texas, I had a chance to argue a case in front of the United States Supreme Court, called Santa Fe Independent School District versus Doe. This was a lawsuit brought by the ACLU, which sought to enjoin or prevent a student led prayer before football games at the Santa Fe Independent School District right outside of Houston. In the end, five judges said that that violated the establishment clause of the Constitution causing Chief Justice Rehnquist to write in his dissent that the Constitution mandates neutrality toward religion, not hostility, but that the court's decision evidenced hostility towards religious expression. Leaving me to conclude that the public square we can talk about everything from violence to misogyny to sex, you name it, but we can't talk about religious  --  sincerely held religious beliefs. I would just footnote that for you and plant the seed for what it's worth. Thank you very much. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cornyn. Welcome to the Majority Leader Schumer. Glad you're with us. And he would report if he could that we have a challenge to finish our hearing today at a time when we can go to the floor for a series of votes which will end the day. So we want to stick to the schedule as much as we possibly can. I will just say that Senator Cornyn's a suggestion of lunch was aspirational. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Ok. [Laughter] DICK DURBIN: It was an unenumerated right. UNKNOWN: You're in charge of the agenda Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: What we would hope to do was to take three more Senators before we have an actual lunch, but it's up to you. Is that all right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh, whatever you want to do, I'm  --  I'm open and here. Happy to answer whoever would like to ask me a question. DICK DURBIN: Thank you. I appreciate that. Senator Whitehouse. SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: Thank you, Chairman. Judge Jackson, you can relax for a bit. I voted for you for the DC Circuit and when you appeared as a potential nominee, we started doing work looking at your record and your story. We met with the President to discuss his process and his goals. When your nomination was announced, we obviously brought work on your record more into focus. And now I've had the chance over  --  what 15, 16 hours to see your performance in this hearing, which I think sets the gold standard for patience and courtesy. So, I'm prepared to not only support you, but to let you know that I will be very proud and very honored and very excited to support you. There are two things that have come up during the course of the hearing, Mr. Chairman, that I'd like to take my time to have a chance to respond to. And the first has been a question. You know, I've been through a bunch of these now, I don't think I've ever heard it come up so much, questions about the nominee's judicial philosophy. I didn't know you needed to have one. I actually thought that when you're dealing with the Constitution, your oath of office, the constitutional precedents, and the Constitution itself kind of gave you your guide path. And when you're construing statutes, the law, and the conventions of the language and your logic gave you that path. So the fact that Judge Jackson has said, I don't have a judicial philosophy, I've got a judicial methodology, doesn't bother me a bit. In fact, it kind of bothers me the expectation that a nominee to the Supreme Court should have a judicial philosophy because a judicial philosophy can be a screen for a predisposition that judges frankly should not have, but the folks and powers and interests influential in the process may very well want them to have. So you know, when I think about judicial philosophy, one of them that's come up a lot has been originalism. And one of the problems with the judicial philosophy is occasional adherence. Selective adherence. Which in my mind makes it less of a judicial philosophy and more of a doctrine of convenience to be trotted out when it helps the people that you want to help. And originalism strikes me as being that kind of a doctrine. And the place where I think we have the biggest gap between philosophy and practice in all of this has been with respect to what I've witnessed with respect to corporate power in our democracy in the time that I have been in the Senate. If you go back to the founding days, there was no expectation that corporations would have any role in American democracy. Doesn't turn up in the Constitutional debates, doesn't turn up in the arguments leading up to the approval of the Constitution. [*]SHELDON WHITEHOUSE: It's only when corporations became big and powerful many decades later that they began to intrude in our politics and they corrupted our politics in a terrible way, history shows. And that led to the movement by muckrakers, whose probably best leader was Teddy Roosevelt, to knock down the grasping political power of corporations and rein them in. And we had some real victories at that time. But ambitions of those of great wealth and power do not go away. And they have continually crept forward. It's an age old story. And right now we have corporate power controlling this Congress in a way that is really remarkable. We have a complete inability to address the climate havoc that fossil fuel emissions are creating because half of Congress has been disarmed and disabled by political influence of the fossil fuel industry. We can't even have a reasonable and sensible discussion on it, because the power of that industry is so great. And we've seen that manifested first with Republican justices on the Supreme Court letting corporations into politics. That was an interesting invention. And then once they were in, they let them spend money in politics. And then once they let them spend money in politics they let them spend unlimited money in politics. And now we are looking at a court whose majority is in the process of building a right for corporations, the biggest and most powerful corporations that we have, to not only get into politics, spend money in politics, and spend unlimited money in politics, but to spend unlimited money in politics anonymously. To hide from the real voters, the we the people, who they actually are when they're intervening in our politics. And to play this game through phony front groups with ridiculous names. Rhode Islanders for Peace and Puppies and Prosperity, you know. It's sort of the quality of the name that's involved. So let's not get too excited about judicial philosophy if it's nothing more than a screen for a predisposition that will benefit certain players in the arena. And let's certainly not take judicial philosophy too seriously when it evaporates in the face of the interests that have pushed the philosophy. And I think originalism qualifies that way. And I just wanted to say that. I don't think you have to have a judicial philosophy. I think you have to have integrity. I think you have to have a judicial temperament. But a philosophy? Where has that come from? The second thing I want to say has to do with the question of court packing and the integrity of the court. And I have a position on this, and I just want to say it so it's all clear and nobody's reading things into it that I don't believe and I've had a chance to make my  --  my point here. And that is the court packing can be done by adding new seats to the court. I haven't proposed that. I think there's only one member in the Senate that has proposed that. It's gotten a lot of attention here, but I don't think it's been proposed here. But you can also pack a court by picking the justices. And in fact there was a long, unpleasant American tradition of agencies being taken over by virtue of picking the members. It's called agency capture or regulatory capture. It goes back a long way. There is an abundant literature both in economics and in administrative law about capture. And there is nothing that makes a court immune to capture. That is why when I talked about this in my initial remarks, I said that the folks that have tried to capture the court have treated it no different than a 19th century railroad commission. Because they were legendary for having been captured by picking the members who would rule for the railroad. And there are many others. Go back to MMS in the Gulf oil explosion. So that is my concern. My concern is that the picking of the justices has been handed to special interests. And we know that's the case because as I showed yesterday, everybody involved admitted it. The President of the United States said so. The fo  --  co-founder of the Federalist Society said so. A former chairman of this committee said so. And the President's legal counsel said so. And what happened in that process by which the justices were picked over at the Federalist Society? We don't know. There wasn't a poll that was taken of Federalist Society members saying, you know, give us your  --  your recommendations. I don't know that there was any meeting of the board. Let's take this up, let's go through a proper agenda. What appears to have happened is that people went into a back room and there was wheeling and dealing, and millions and millions of dark money dollars flowed into the Federalist Society during this period. And what came out were names. And those went straight to the President and straight to here. But the picking appears to have been done in the confines of a private organization by anonymous special interests. There is no country in the world that does that by way of how you pick judges. If we went to some banana republic to try to educate them in democracy and that was the way they picked their judges we'd have a lot to say about it. But that is the way that recent justices have been picked. Court packing by court picking. And deputizing this to the Federalist Society is very unusual. Them having no process  --  no public process for implementing that deputization is very unusual. The provenance of these mysterious lists that were produced and how people got on and off them, that is very unusual. Unprecedented in our history. And it's surrounded by lots and lots of dark money. $400 million I think is a lot of anonymous money that has been chronicled being spent to control who gets put on the court. And controlling who gets put on a governmental body is how you capture a governmental body. And a captured governmental body is a wrong thing, whether it's a railroad commission or the United States Supreme Court. There is in that method of judicial selection not just the prospect of impropriety. But indeed, the likelihood of impropriety. If it's pay to play and checks for millions anonymously delivered will get you into the room to decide who is going to be on the Supreme Court, we got a problem. And that's what happened. And the thing that makes it even worse in my view is that as you pursue this and play it out, you see the decisions of the court line up in an astonishingly clear pattern with the interests of big Republican dark money donors. That is my concern. That I think is a legitimate concern. If you disagree with me, disagree with me. But that is the concern. And I wanted to lay it out here because it's not about court packing. It's about the integrity of the court. And it's about the unfortunate comparison that can be made now between the captured agencies delivered through picking of their membership and what looks more and more like a captured court delivered by the picking of its membership in secret with a very, very high ticket price to be in the room where the picking took place. So like I said, colleagues can agree, colleagues can disagree with  --  we all have our shots to make our cases. Because this has come up tangentially in multiple different ways I wanted to take this moment and lay out what my case is and explain it as clearly and simply as I can. And I thank the Chairman for allowing me that opportunity. And I yield back my remaining seven minutes. And I congratulate, your Honor, you for the patience that you've shown with all of us. It's not over, but it's close. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Whitehouse. And of course you've joined the hall of fame yielding back seven minutes. Senator Lee. MIKE LEE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Judge. I want to talk next a little bit about a case that you were involved in a case called Coal River Mountain watch versus United States Department of the Interior. [*]MIKE LEE: It was decided  --  a  --  a  --  a ruling that you issue in 2015, while in the Federal District Court. I know you've handled a lot of cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I have. MIKE LEE: I can't -- can't imagine that by merely triggering the  --  the case name that would necessarily bring it back. But this case involved a  --  a challenge to an administrative action within the Department of Interior on some issues bearing on coal mining within the state of West Virginia.There were two parallel challenges brought against that administrative action, one in a federal district court in West Virginia where the land in question was located and another in the US District Court for the District of Columbia, where you sat. The  --  the government defending itself against that action brought by some environmental groups asked that you dismiss the  --  the DC case so that the matter could be litigated in West Virginia. You denied that. Can you  --  based on my description of the facts, does that ring any bells, and can you tell me why you might have denied it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. It actually doesn't. It sounds like, you know, dozens of cases that I handled with similar issues and requests. Something like a motion to dismiss is early in the action. MIKE LEE: Sure, Sure. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And so, denying a motion to dismiss is pretty routine of District of Columbia. MIKE LEE: No, I  --  I understand. And  --  and I'm sure you handled a lot of those  --  a lot of those all the time as a district judge.The reason I raise it is just because it  --  it relates indirectly to some concerns that I've got that  --  that are somewhat unique to the Western United States. We have a lot of cases that involve the US Department of the Interior and agency actions taken relative to the public land that we have. In every state east of Colorado, the federal government owns less than 15 percent of the land. In most of those, it's much less than 15 percent, in the single digits or low single digits. In every state, Colorado and west of Colorado, the federal government owns more than 15 percent of the land, and most of the time it's a lot more. In my state, it happens to be about two-thirds of the land that's owned by the federal government. As a result, it complicates our ability to do just about everything we do, whether it's recreation, construction, oil and gas development, whether it's just accessing people's farms and ranches, or even something as  --  as simple as trying to fund local fire, police, search and rescue operations. All these things are affected by the excessive ownership of  --  of federal land by the federal government and the way it's often managed.Sometimes decisions made at the federal level are challenged in parallel actions like these, one in the  --  in the forum state and the host state to where the action is happening, another in DC. And I'm always concerned about forum shopping. And I'm sure that's something you watched out for as a judge and saw forum shopping from time to time.It's also something that, you know, touches on an  --  an issue that involves statutory interpretation. There is something called the Antiquities Act, passed 110 years ago or so, designed to give presidents of the United States the authority to designate federal  --  parcels of federal land as national monuments.The text of the statute states that the limits of the parcels in question should be "confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected."Now, given that these presidential proclamations tend to be broad, it's  --  sometimes the objects to be protected are also broad. And as a result of that, it's difficult to tell what the limits are. Do you have any reaction as to how we could discern that, how we could divine any meaning out of that? It's got to mean something, the text of the statute. You  --  you  --  you try not to leave language simply unaddressed or meaningless in a statue. Do you have any thoughts on how a statue like that, saying that it should be confined to the smallest area compatible with the proper care and management of the objects to be protected? Any thoughts briefly on that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, if I were presented with a case with that statute in that circumstance, I would proceed as I always have. You would have to understand the parties' arguments about the particulars in the case. What  --  what does the presidential proclamation say, to what does it relate, whether there are any precedents in this area that define  --  further define or further address what Congress intended with respect to the statute at issue. MIKE LEE: And I would assume that it would also matter if the  --  if the government's lawyers defending the president's action made an argument that would leave the  --  the interpretation open-ended and meaningless. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, as part of your interpretive exercise as you're considering the parties various arguments, one that did not account for all the words in a statute would be one that you would  -- MIKE LEE: Excellent. Excellent. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Might not  --  might not agree with. MIKE LEE: If you  --  no, I get it. And this is one of the things that I've appreciated about what you've told us in these hearings. I  --  I really like the way you've described the fact it's important to construe the text that you're asked to interpret. And in interpreting that, you look at the language and you're  --  you're endeavoring to figure out the original public meaning. And I  --  I think that is a very helpful thing. All right. Let's move to a different issue a moment ago. Now you clerked on the US Supreme Court for Justice Breyer in October term 1999, is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is right. MIKE LEE: That was the  --  the same  --  and you clerked for Justice Breyer. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did. MIKE LEE: And that was the same year that the Supreme Court issued its decision in a case called Stenberg versus Carhart. This is the case where the Supreme Court of the United States struck down a Nebraska law prohibiting partial birth abortion, and in the absence of circumstances where the baby posed a threat to the life of the mother. Now, to be clear, the  --  the law prohibited a procedure where the abortionist causes an unborn baby to be partially delivered by the mother, and then the abortionist intentionally kills the baby outside the womb by puncturing its skull with scissors and then collapsing the skull. This is gruesome, and I  --  I don't like having to quote this, but it  --  it is relevant to the topic we're covering here. Justice Kennedy described it this way, in chilling terms when he  --  in his dissent, when he describes the fact that when scissors are inserted into the back of the head, the fetus's body, wholly outside the woman's body and alive, reacts as though startled and then goes limp. Justice Scalia, in his great eloquence, expressed  --  lamented the ruling, but also expressed optimism for the fact that future courts would get it right, saying "I'm optimistic enough to believe that one day Stenberg versus Carhart will be assigned to its rightful place in the history of this court's jurisprudence beside Korematsu and Dred Scott. This method of killing a human child, one cannot even accurately say an entirely unborn human child, prescribed by this statute is so horrible that the most clinical description of it evokes a shudder of revulsion." We then saw a few years later the Supreme Court of the United States issue a different ruling. The Supreme Court issued a different ruling in a case called Gonzales v Carhart. Gonzales v Carhart upheld a different statute. This one was federal rather than state, but it was a different federal stat  --  a federal statute that also prohibited partial birth abortion. Judge Jackson, can you distinguish these cases for me? What was the difference between Gonzales v Carhart where the partial birth abortion ban in question was upheld, whereas in Stenberg v Carhart it  --  it was invalidated? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I don't have the opinions in front of me. I think  --  I think it had to do with the method of extraction, the fact finding related to the procedure. I  --  in one case, the District Court had made some findings and  --  and the court felt bound by them. In another, there was considerations beyond those that were previously relied upon. MIKE LEE: Yep. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, there were distinctions that the court looked at and considered in the cases. But I'm  --  yes. MIKE LEE: Let's talk about court packing for a minute. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. MIKE LEE: One of the reasons court packing concerns me, one of the many reasons, is because it's not prohibited. In the first instance, it's not prohibited by the Constitution. There's nothing in the Constitution that says that Congress may not change the size of the Supreme Court. [*]MIKE LEE: There's no limitation on that. We have, for 152 years with the number nine if it has worked in the absence of an argument saying that that number is two is too low, the court is too small. From a workforce standpoint, we need to expand it. It's difficult to imagine why it would be a good idea to change it, particularly because if you increase the size of the court in one fell swoop -- swoop and you do that for partisan political purposes, allowing one President, the current President to have a disproportionately impact on the court and to change its rulings the -- that portion of the court's docket that tends to be more politically contentious, it can turn the court into a political football of sorts given the fact that our Supreme Court justices serve for life. Once you do that, it becomes something of a one way ratchet, always expanding, never contracting Before long, you could see an increasingly larger court with the court expanding each time a different party secures the coveted circumstance of a majority in the House, Majority in the Senate, and controlled by the same party of the White House. And so this is why it concerns me. I understand why it is that the canons of judicial ethics don't allow you to comment on matters that might come before you. This is one that could not come before you as a justice. This is a non-justiciable political question. It's committed to the two political branches of government. There's not even a constitutional challenge that could lie to it, even though it's  --  it would undermine the separation of powers in the Constitution as I see it. It's not unconstitutional. So it couldn't  --  and it would never come before you. Last night, when you were asked a question by my colleague Senator Kennedy on this, you acknowledged that you have an opinion. Did I understand that right? You have an opinion on court packing? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I have a lot of opinions, I have opinions on  --  on  --  I'm a human being and I have an opinion on a lot of things. The reason why, in my view, it is not appropriate for me to comment is because of my fidelity to the judicial role. I understand that it's a political question and that is precisely why I think that I am uncomfortable speaking to it. MIKE LEE: I understand that. And I do respect  --  I respect the impulse. I respect the overall issue. And I think it's  --  it's better for Article three judges and justices ordinarily to not wade into the political thicket. This one I do think is different because No.1, as I say, it can never come before you. No. 2, it does have an impact on what you would be doing. And you also as an Article three judge, someone who has served for nearly nine years as a federal judge, you've developed experience and intuition and a thorough understanding of our federal court system. And that's why I think your perspective on it would be valuable. The reason it concerns me so much is that even when court packing doesn't succeed legislatively, it can leave an impact. The last time this was attempted was in 1937, President Franklin D Roosevelt was upset at the Supreme Court on a number of  --  of bases. He didn't like the then 32 year old precedent of Lochner versus New York where five conservatives on the Supreme Court engaged in an act of judicial activism reading something into the Constitution that wasn't really there. Some people disagree with me on this, but I  --  it wasn't there. And they imposed that. But the bigger reason was he didn't like the court's interpretation of the Commerce Clause. It was that interpretation of the Commerce Clause, the one we discussed yesterday, you know, prior to 1937, you  --  you had the Supreme Court agreeing as far as the channels and instrumentalities of interstate commerce that we talked about yesterday. You had the court more or less in agreement over time as to the impact of the dormant commerce clause. But as to the substantial effects test, that didn't exist yet. It required something much closer to an interstate commercial transaction in order for Congress  --  Congress's Commerce Clause authority to kick in. There were the so-called Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse as FDR affectionately called them. Four conservatives who were consistently pushing for limits on Congress's authority. And then you had other justices who would sometimes join with them. Usually that included Justice Owen Roberts who had stood with them in maintaining narrower authority for Congress under the Commerce Clause. All that changed when on April 12th, 1937, two weeks to the day when that is the case often associated with the so-called switch in time that changed nine, West Coast Hotel versus Parish, where they undid the Lochner precedent. April 12th, 1937, the Supreme Court decided a case, NLRB versus Jones & Laughlin Steel that forever changed, magnified, expanded the commerce clause in a way that had it been through a constitutional amendment, it would be among the most significant impactful constitutional amendments ever adopted. And yet it's rarely discussed. This  --  this case resulted from one vote, one person on the Supreme Court who changed his vote, Associate Justice Owen Roberts. It's widely believed, and I believe it based on what I've researched on it, he was influenced heavily by FDR's court packing plan. He didn't want to be on a court that was packed. He didn't want  --  he convinced himself that he made that switch in order to save the court as it was. And that has changed everything. It's led to a much bigger, more expensive, more intrusive  --  intrusive federal government. We can disagree as to the policy merits of that, but it did change the Constitution. That's why I worry about that. So I hope  --  I understand you don't want to answer  --  I hope that between now and the end of the day, you'll see fit to tell us what your opinion is. I do think it's worth  --  worth discussing. Let's talk for a minute. I've got just moments left. I want to get back to your  --  your  --  your sentencing approach. Now, when you approach these child pornography cases, what you're describing in many circumstances is an overall concern that you've got with the sentencing guidelines and particularly that that portion of the sentencing guidelines that deals with child pornography cases. This showed up in the  --  in the transcripts of some of your sentencing hearings, including the  --  the  --  the transcript of your sentencing hearing in the  --  in the Hawkins case. I turn to that to Page 38 lines 17 to 24 of that transcript. And here's something you say in that Hawkins case, and I believe this was the 18 year old defendant that you sentenced to  --  to 3 months in prison. When the lower end of the guidelines range would have been 97, I think the higher end would have been in the 120s or something like that. You said, and in your case, this is you speaking to Mr. Hawkins, in your case in particular, I don't feel that it is appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer or the number of images or prepubescent victims as the guidelines require because these circumstances exist, in many cases, if not most, and don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. I've got a couple of questions about that. Were those  --  you start off that paragraph sounding like you're  --  you're making a determination as to him, but then the observations you make in that paragraph seem to apply broadly. Is that  --  is that right? So it would  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I don't have the transcript of Mr. Hawkins case. I recall that I found that case, like all child pornography cases to be difficult, really difficult. And his case I recall was in many ways an outlier in terms of the various considerations that Congress required me to take into account. MIKE LEE: But there were prepubescent victims there were at stake and  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't remember, how many  --  I don't remember the circumstances of his actual crime. What  --  what I will say is that consistent with Supreme Court case law and Congress's statute in this area, judges have to take into account a number of factors and the guidelines which are no longer, I won't say not mandatory, you have to calculate the guidelines, they're no longer binding. And the Supreme Court has said that under the statutory scheme, judges have discretion. MIKE LEE: Ok, but  --  my  --  my  --  I'm almost out of time here  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. MIKE LEE: --  but I want to make the point. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. MIKE LEE: Hawkins, as I recall and as Senator Hawley discussed yesterday, he specifically asked for images of 11 to 17 year olds. So I  --  I don't understand how that can be an instance where that shouldn't matter.  [*]MIKE LEE: And with the fact that he did it with a computer, hardly atones for what he was doing, hardly offsets the fact that he was seeking and obtained prepubescent child pornography in  nor does the fact that the -- the images become easier over time to transmit and receive and store because of computers. I actually think it cuts in precisely the opposite discre -- direction that you described. It makes it more severe, not less. I see this as an aggravating factor and that -- that is of great concern to me. I see I've exceeded my time. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: You may respond. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as in every child pornography case that I sentenced I considered all of the evidence, all of the relevant factors. It is not the same exercise to look at a transcript, to think about guidelines, to not have in front of you the individuals, the victims, the pictures, the circumstances that trial judges have to review in these cases or any cases. I understand, Senator, that there are some questions about records, et cetera. Courts have all of the evidence and courts have all of the recommendations of various parties. And courts have under Congress's authority the responsibility of using our judgment to make determinations that are sufficient but not greater than necessary to comply with the purposes or promote the purposes of Punishment, taking into account things like unwarranted sentencing disparities. And it may seem  --  it may seem like an easy exercise. It may seem in retrospect when you look back at a few pieces of data that courts have not done what it is that they are supposed to do. But what I can assure you is that I took every one of these cases seriously in my duty and responsibility as a judge. And I made my determinations in light of the seriousness of the offense, the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant, the need for the sentence imposed to promote various purposes of punishment, and all of the other factors that Congress proscribed? MIKE LEE: Ok. But you  --  you keep resetting that standard. And  --  and yet you specifically excluded from consideration the fact that he had requested and obtained images  --  pre-pubescent child pornography images  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator I didn't  --  I didn't exclude it. I didn't exclude it. What I did was I looked at the guidelines, which is what the Supreme Court requires, and I ma  --  I was making policy determinations as the Supreme Court says that judges are to do  -- MIKE LEE: Lo  --  looking at page 38 of your transcript it looks to me like you excluded it. And  --  and your  --  your actions sentencing him to three months for one of the most heinous offenses imaginable. Keep in mind because these are transmitted electronically  -- DICK DURBIN:   Senator, we  -- MIKE LEE:   They're there for years. They revictimize these victims  -- DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- MIKE LEE: The rest of their lives. DICK DURBIN: We're asking everyone to try to stick with the 20 minutes, please. Next is Senator Klobuchar, but before recognizing her I'd like to ask consent to enter into the record a support letter for Judge Jackson from 48 former federal prosecutors in South Florida. Without objection. Senator Klobuchar. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you very much, Chairman Durbin. Welcome back Judge Jackson. Yesterday, you and I discussed the court's increasing reliance on issuing unsigned orders on its shadow docket. And less than an hour ago the court once again used the shadow docket to throw out Wisconsin's redistricting maps. And because this decision just came out, I don't expect you to have immediately reviewed it. But I just want to make this point that in her dissent Justice Sotomayor joi  --  joined by Justice Kagan called the court's move unprecedented. She noted that in an emergency posture, the court summarily overturns a Wisconsin Supreme Court decision resolving a conflict over the state's redistricting, a decision that was rendered after a five month process involving all interested stakeholders based on an obligation that is  --  these are her words  --  hazy at best even though summary reversals are generally reserved for decisions in violation of settled law. And again I don't expect you to be familiar with this case. But I do want to point out that this underscores the point that I made yesterday that the court's increasing practice of using the shadow docket to decide cases that have grave consequences for our democracy, including the right to vote that you and many other nominees have said is fundamental, is incredibly troubling. You had in the other case I mentioned yesterday where Justice Roberts dissented, the Texas abortion bounty hunter case, that that should not have been done on the shadow docket. And while I'm not going to ask you about this because you couldn't possibly have read it, just your record of writing decisions that are thorough and listening to litigants in cases. Could you just generally talk about the importance of having full briefings on the merits as well as public oral arguments if you believe in transparency? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As  --  as a judge in my work over the last decade, I've seen that it is very important at least to me in my time as a judge to date to hear arguments from all sides in a case. The duty of a judge in  --  in  --  is to make determinations and under our system of adversarial proceedings you make determinations based on arguments. And  --  and it's important to do so. I know that with respect to the emergency docket, I  --  you haven't asked me the question about it because I would say what I said before, which is I would benefit from being able to speak with the justices. I understand that there's a need to balance getting full briefing with emergency circumstances. And the court has long had in its  --  in its procedures the ability to  --  to rule quickly on various cases. It's also my understanding from my time clerking on the court that the court does recognize the value of allowing things to what we call percolate, meaning lower courts to hear issues. And my understanding is that at least in some of the recent cases, the justices have  --  have had oral argument related to some emergency matters. But from my perspective as a  --  a judge in the work that I've been doing, I know that it's important to hear from the parties. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Mm-hm. Another hallmark of your work has been taking complex issues and making them accessible to the public. So much so that I actually referred to one of your opinions from a debate stage in Los Angeles saying as a wise judge said. Those are my words. I guess I was ahead of my time. The President is not King in America, the law is king. I paraphrased it. That was a written opinion that you wrote that was over 65 pages long, relied extensively on Supreme Court and circuit precedent. It was Committee on the Judiciary v McGahn. And could you talk about really two things: the importance of having the law written in terms that are easy to understand by people, and then secondly, your opinion was actually a narrow one. It required Mr. McGahn to appear to testify. But that said he remained free to assert any legally applicable privilege in response to the questions asked. So what you did there was a narrow opinion. What  --  what role do you think that narrow rulings play in helping to maintain the legitimacy of the court? Why is it important to have plain language in orders? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, I'll start with the second first. I think that, you know, as  --  as we've been discussing, we have a rule of law in this country which requires a certain amount of predictability and stability in the law. If there are big shifts in terms of legal principles and doctrines and whatnot, it could lead to people not understanding that judges are ruling on legal principles. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It could lead to undermining public confidence, thinking that judges are injecting their own policy preferences rather than following the law in  terms of their rulings. And so to further predictability, stability, there are many doctrines in judicial practice. There is stare decisis, which is the principle that if something has already been decided very similarly, you -- at least if it may be binding on you if you're a lower court, but at least you have to contend with it because that is the law that was -- that existed before you got the case and you don't want to make a big shift. And then there's also the principle that, you know, the understanding that when you are announcing rulings, you are building on what exists before and so not so you don't want to make a big shift if you don't have to, because if you can find a way to rule incrementally in a more narrow way, it keeps the law stable. It is a part of the proposition that I  --  that I mentioned before. In McGann in particular, it was  --  it was a case in which there was a precedent directly on point from my district. It was not binding on me, but the exact same set of circumstances and arguments had been presented to another judge in my district, I believe it was something like ten years prior to my case, and so we had law that governed the circumstance. And I looked at that, determined it was persuasive, and that I should continue the principles that had been laid down by  --  by in the prior case. Also in accordance with those principles, the prior judge and I made the determination that when the president claims absolute immunity, the argument was that. the person who had been subpoenaed by the legislature, a former employee of the White House could  --  could say that they had immunity of some sort. In other words, it could have  --  invoke executive privilege in response to particular questions, but they couldn't say I don't have to show up at all. And so the argument that was being made was when the House of Representatives issues a subpoena and says show up on this day at this time to answer questions. Does that person  --  can that person just ignore and say I have immunity? I don't have to follow the law. In other words, respond to the subpoena. Or do I have to show up and sit there and listen to the questions? And if there are things that I believe I can't answer because they're privilege, then you invoke the privilege. And the prior case had said in this narrow way, you have to show up. You don't necessarily have to give the information that's determined on a question by question basis. But you have to show up. And that's what I held in that case as well. And it  --  and it's important to be clear in your rulings so that people understand that judges are  --  are ruling consistent with the law and not their own personal views. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Right. And speaking being clear and being careful in your rulings, some of my colleagues have, I think given not necessarily true view of your whole record because when it comes to your rulings being upheld, the numbers show that out of over 550 cases, your district court cases, you were reversed less than 30 percentof the time. And in some of the instances, you're reversed only to have your decision later upheld. I noticed one case territory of Guam v United States in which you were initially reversed, but then a unanimous Supreme Court reversed that decision in siding with you in an opinion written by Justice Thomas and aligned with your view. Do you want to quickly talk about that case? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, that case is kind of legally complicated. It was  --  it was a cercla case, which is a superfund cleanup kind of case, where the country of Guam, which had  --  which has a  --  a dump site on it that was used by both the citizens of Guam and the United States before the 1950s when the United States was stationed there, military operations happened out of Guam, and there was a lot of dumping into this site. And over time, the site got contaminated, and Guam was charged with having to clean it up, which is millions and millions of dollars. And there are statutes  --  very complicated statutes about the circumstances under which you can seek contribution, under which a country like that can ask for the United States to pay some of that cost or other countries to pay some of that cost. And that was sort of the nature of the dispute. And I did a statutory interpretation about whether or not Guam's action could proceed. The United States filed a motion to dismiss saying that all of the technical requirements of the law weren't met and that the action had to be dismissed, and I denied the motion to dismiss after interpreting the statute saying that the action could continue. The DC Circuit reversed my view, had a different reading of the statute, saying that the motion to dismiss should have been granted and dismissed the case, and then it was appealed to the Supreme Court. And as you say, the Supreme Court reinstated the action saying it could proceed. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Very good. Thank you. In 1972, in Brandenburg v Hayes a 54 court did not recognize the reporter's privilege in the context of criminal grand jury testimony. And I spoke with you earlier at length about Tans [Ph] v Sullivan and First Amendment issues. So this will be my last question on this. Since the court's decision, my state, like many other states, enacted strong reporter's privilege laws to protect journalists from having to divulge unpublished materials, confidential sources. How would you approach balancing the need to protect journalists and the role they play in informing the public against the need for law enforcement officers to gather information? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would apply the  --  the precedents of the Supreme Court in this area. It would depend on the circumstances. As  --  as I mentioned, press freedoms is one of the fundamental First Amendment rights. The court has a number of precedents in terms of  --  of expressive freedom, press freedom. And in every case there will be a specific set of circumstances regarding an alleged violation of the right. And the court would need to look at the facts and circumstances, the prior precedent, in order to determine whether that particular regulation could be upheld. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Ok. Thank you. This is my very last question, Chair, before all of us get to eat lunch, including you. And that is really the important role of dissenting opinions. Justice Ginsburg once said this. She said dissents speak to a future age. It's not simply to say my colleagues are wrong and I would do it this way, but the greatest dissents do become court opinions. And gradually over time, their views sometimes become the dominant view. When Justice Ginsburg's rabbi gave a eulogy at her memorial service here in the Capitol and some of us were fortunate enough to be there, he said Justice Ginsburg's dissents were not cries of defeat, they were blueprints for the future. What do you think is the purpose of a dissent and do you want to talk just a little bit about that, this idea that they can be blueprints for the future? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. On the Supreme Court, there are nine justices and in every case they're all sitting together to hear the issues in a case, and one hopes and it often happens that the justices agree as to issues in cases that I believe that the vast majority of cases that the justices hear are actually not  --  there is no dissent that they  --  that they agree to the outcome. But there are cases in which after deliberation and collaboration and consideration, the justices may disagree about how  --  how the case should be resolved. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And there is a mechanism for every justice to decide whether they're going to join others, either in the majority, whether they're going to write a separate opinion that might agree with a majority, but wants to make a different point or whether they -- they want to dissent. And sometimes, more than one justice might dissent or join a dissent. It's a way of expressing -- expressing one's own view that may differ from -- from your colleagues. And with respect to the point that you made, there are actually many justices in history who have used the dissent mechanism to discuss the law in ways that others find over time to be more persuasive. And so, I'm thinking of  --  I'm thinking of the first Justice Harlan who dissented famously in Plessy versus Ferguson. He dissented alone. All of the other justices agreed with the proposition of  --  of separate but equal, and he said no in a dissent. And his dissent generations later became according to  --  to Justice, Thurgood Marshall became the blueprint for Justice Marshall to make arguments that led to Brown versus the board. So there is the opportunity for justices to describe their views in ways that become persuasive to others in the future. AMY KLOBUCHAR: Thank you for all you've given us the last few days. We look forward to working with you. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Thank you. Senator Klobuchar, And we're going to break now for a 30 minute lunch. I'd say to everyone that when we return  --  if we stick to 20-minute rounds and don't yield back time, we'll be finishing in something around four and a half hours which would take us to about 7:00. So that doesn't include a break, but we'll consider that later on. Thank you, Judge again. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. [*]DICK DURBIN: Welcome back, Judge. As you can see things get off the rails here when they decide to have a floor vote. We'll do our best to stick with the program and finish this is -- in a proper way. The next up is Senator Cruz of Texas. TED CRUZ: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, good afternoon. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good afternoon, Senator. TED CRUZ: Under article three of the Constitution federal courts have jurisdiction over only cases and controversies. Which means under the Constitution it has to be an actual dispute, that federal courts cannot simply issue advisory opinions on -- on a question they may have a view on. And one component of article three jurisdiction is the requirement of standing. That in order for a plaintiff to have standing to bring a case that that plaintiff at least generally speaking must have a real and concrete injury. Is  --  is  --  is  --  is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is correct. TED CRUZ: So, for example, that  --  that  --  that means that  --  that even if I might have a disagreement with some particular policy or some particular law that  --  that I can't bring a case unless I am personally aggrieved by that policy or that law. So, for example, your and my alma mater, Harvard, is currently being sued for its explicit and in my view, egregious policy of discriminating against Asian-Americans. Even though I think that policy is egregious, I as an individual plaintiff could not bring a lawsuit challenging it because I am not Asian-American. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: If you brought a lawsuit, the court would have to evaluate whether you had an actual injury in order to be able to determine whether it had subject matter jurisdiction to hear the suit. TED CRUZ: But  --  but if I'm not in the class being discriminated against, then I don't have the ability to bring the lawsuit. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think  --  I  --  you'd have to have an actual injury. Certainly people I think who are in the class could claim that they had an injury for that purpose. TED CRUZ: So now you're  --  you're on the board of overseers of Harvard. If you're confirmed, do you intend to recuse from this lawsuit? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That is my plan, Senator. TED CRUZ: Ok. We discussed yesterday how the standard for race discrimination was strict scrutiny. The court has laid out a  --  a different standard for gender discrimination. What is the constitutional standard that applies to  --  to gender discrimination? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Gender discrimination, the court has held, intermediate scrutiny applies. Which is that the government has to have an important interest and the tailoring doesn't have to be as narrow. TED CRUZ: Right. So yesterday under  --  under questioning from Senator Blackburn you told her that  --  that you couldn't define what a woman is, that you are not a biologist. Which  --  which I think you're the  --  the only Supreme Court nominee in history who's been unable to answer the question what is a woman. Let me ask you as a judge, how would you determine if a plaintiff had article three standing to challenge a gender based rule regulation policy without being able to determine what a woman was? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, Senator, I know that I'm a woman. I know that Senator Blackburn is a woman and the woman who I admire most in the world is in the room today, my mother. It sounded as though the question was  -- TED CRUZ: --  Well, but let  --  let me ask under the modern leftist sensibilities, if  --  if I decide right now that  --  that I'm a woman, then apparently I'm a woman. Does that mean that I would have article three standing to challenge a gender based restriction? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, to the extent that you are asking me about who has the ability to bring lawsuits based on gender, those kinds of issues are working their way through the courts and I'm not able to comment on them. TED CRUZ: Ok. If  --  if I can change my gender, if I can be a woman, and then an hour later if I decide I'm not a woman anymore I guess I would lose article three standing. Tell me, does that same principle apply to other protected characteristics? For example, I'm  --  I'm an Hispanic man. Could  --  could I decide I was an Asian man? Wo  --  would I have the ability to be an Asian man and challenge Harvard's discrimination because I made that decision? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I'm not able to answer your question. You're asking me about hypotheticals and  -- TED CRUZ: --  I'm asking how you would assess standing if I  --  if I came in and said I have decided I identify as an Asian man. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I would assess standing the way I assess other legal issues which is to the arguments made by the parties, consider the relevant precedents and constitutional principles involved and make a determination. TED CRUZ: Ok, let's go back to your favorite topic of this hearing, which is the criminal law cases you had as a district judge and in particular the cases involving child pornography. Now your defenders both on the Democratic side of the dais and also in the press have suggested that that the criticism that has been raised has been somehow cherry picked, that -- that it's only some specific examples. So I'm going to give you an opportunity to discuss each and every case you've had because looking at your cases and I've now examined all of the child porn cases you've had as a federal district judge, there is a very consistent pattern. So let's start -- and by the way, I'm excluding the cases --  so Senator Durbin and Senator Coons focused on the Nickerson case, the [Inaudible] case, the Nguyen case and the Healy case. I'm excluding those because those are not child porn cases. Those are actual sexual assault of a child, which is markedly different. And I will concede when you're dealing with sexual assault, you have been willing to impose stricter penalties. So let's focus on actual child pornography cases and let's go through each of them because if it's right that we're cherry picking, then you should be able to  --  to explain quite powerfully. Now, your justification is that you're following the statute. And as you know, 18 USC Section 3553 lays out the factors that  --  that as a district judge, you had to consider in sentencing. And let's start with the Hess case United States versus Hess. Now in that case, a man sent six pictures of a prepubescent girl that he claimed was his daughter to an undercover law enforcement officer. Officers found over 600 images of child pornography, including images of sexual acts being performed on prepubescent children. The defendant pled guilty. And I believe in all of these cases, the defendant pled guilty. So there's no question about guilt. They came in and pled guilty in your courtroom. The charge carried a minimum mandatory minimum sentence of five years and a mandatory maximum sentence of 20 years. The sentencing guidelines recommended 151 to 188 months sentence. The government as part of a plea agree a deal agreed to argue for six months, but didn't agree that that would be the sentence simply that they would advocate it. And you in turn sentenced Hess to 60 months. So under the terms of the statute, why did you choose to sentence Hess to the absolute lowest possible sentence you were allowed to sentence under law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. I have spoken at length throughout this hearing about these cases. I've said what I'm going to say, which is I've taken every case seriously. These are very horrible crimes. And I've taken every case seriously. TED CRUZ: So you're not going to answer that. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: These are very horrible crimes as was that one. And as a mother having to look at these pictures, having to follow Congress's directive, having to listen to recommendations like the government in that case, which argued for 60 months, I imposed the sentence that I believed was the sentence that was required by law. TED CRUZ: So I believe you. And I've actually  --  I've read your sentencing hearing in each one of these cases for which we have transcripts. And there are several of which we don't have transcripts. So in each of these cases, you read from the same script. So in each of these cases, you say that the distribution of child pornography is an extremely serious federal crime. And you point out that the crime involves people who are taking pictures and videos of real children while the children are being sexually abused. In Hess, you pointed out that he had hundreds  --  hundreds of images of children in sexually compromised position, some of them in engage in sadomasochistic acts, all of this I'm reading from you on the bench. And most importantly the children in these pictures are not knowing and willing participants in the degrading conduct that was being depicted. They were being forced  --  forced by someone off screen to commit unspeakable acts of sexual violence for the pleasure of the people filming them and for the gratification of people everywhere. And what concerns me is that many of those people have absolutely no shred of empathy for what that conduct does for the children who were being abused in this way. And you read this script in every one of these cases. So you talk about it that these are terrible, terrible crimes. But you also and in Hess, you said I have to say that what I found particularly disturbing about your offense. was that quote you apparently concocted a story about having photographed your own daughter who you purportedly were willing to take pictures of to trade with other people. I know from your comments and from those who know you that you are unlikely to ever harm a child, which I find remarkable that you've got a child predator in your court who says I'm unlikely to harm a child. And you say, well, you told me that so  --  So clearly you're unlikely. But you say, but in the context of the crime you represented that you would  --  that in and of itself is astonishing. So you talk about it is astonishing. You nonetheless sentenced him to the very lowest possible sentence allowed under law. And what's striking is in these cases, in half of them in five, you sentence the defendant to the absolute lowest sentence under law. Let's look at another case. Let's look at United States versus Chazin. Now, Chazin is a particularly nasty case. In Chazin, the defendant was accused and accessed a Dropbox that contained 35 videos and 13 partially downloaded files of prepubescent minor females engaging in sexually explicit conduct. At least three of the instances of prepubescent female children were engaged in sexual activity with adult men. The images included the sexual abuse of children, including those as young as toddlers and several of these cases that you had involved the sexual abuse of toddlers, which is truly horrifying. In this instance, Chazin pleaded guilty, The guidelines recommended a sentence of 78 to 97 months. The prosecution argued that should be what the sentence was, and you sentence Chazin to just 28 months. Why did you sentence someone who had child pornography of toddlers being sexually abused to 28 months, 64 percent below what the prosecutors asked for? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. You've picked out, I don't know, seven, eight cases. I've sentenced more than 100 people, but not to child pornography. TED CRUZ: But, not to child pornography. These are your child porn cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And in every case  --  in every case, Senator I look at the evidence, I look at the recommendations of not just the government because my duty as a judge  --  a judge is to consider all of the arguments that are made in a case. I look at the evidence, I talk to the defendants about the harms that they have engaged in. Many of these defendants are people who  -- TED CRUZ: Ok, judge, with respect, you're not answering my question. You're right. You talk to them about the harms. Let me read you again from what you said at the bench. You said in this instance with  --  with Mr. Chazin, you said among the defendants nationwide who received a below guideline sentence on the basis of a downward variance as opposed to a departure The average sentences ranged from 84 to 92 months. So that's what you lay out as the average. Our Democratic colleagues say, well, other federal judges sentence below the guidelines. That is true. A number of federal judges do. Our Democratic colleagues have not pointed to a single federal judge in the country who 100 percent of the time sentences child porn defendants to markedly below what the prosecution has recommended unless you have a mandatory minimum and no ability to do so. In this case, you say comparable defendants are sentenced to 84 to 92 months. The sentencing guidelines by statute require you to have similarly situated defendants sentenced to similar sentences, but you don't sentence Chazin to 84 to 92 months. You sentenced him to 28 months. Why? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I've said what I'm going to say about these cases. No one case can stand in for a judge's entire record. TED CRUZ: Ok, but I'm discussing every one of the cases. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I understand that. TED CRUZ: So if you're not going to explain it -- DICK DURBIN: Senator, would you please let her Respond? TED CRUZ: No, not if she's not going to answer my question. DICK DURBIN: Well, if you're just to give a speech, then you shouldn't engage in question. TED CRUZ: And you are not taking my time, If you want to filibuster, you're welcome to do so, But -- [Crosstalk] DICK DURBIN: I would at least give you an opportunity to speak, and you should give her an opportunity to respond. TED CRUZ: If she wants to answer the question, I asked her why  -- DICK DURBIN: Please, allow her to answer the question. TED CRUZ: I asked her why she sentenced Chazin to 28 months when comparable defendants in her own words were sentenced to substantially higher. And she said she's not going to answer. Did you  --  I mean, I would welcome your answer. DICK DURBIN: I didn't hear that -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I didn't say I'm not going to answer. I said my answer -- TED CRUZ: Ok, well then, please tell us in these facts, in this case Chazin, why did you sentence him to just 28 months.[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator,  you're looking at the record; I don't have the record here. What I will say, is that in every case I looked at the recommendations of not only the government but also the probation office, the defendant, the record, the evidence I took into account the seriousness of the offense -- TED CRUZ: By the way, you know, one of the striking things in Chasen, the prosecutor comes in front of you and says this is the prosecutor's argument at this point, and the prosecutor says, I understand from my experience before Your Honor, Your Honor's objection -- policy objections to the --  to the  --  2g2.2 sentencing guidelines. And he goes on to say, however in this case in particular, the four point specific offense characteristic is justified because it contains sadomasochistic images of infants and toddlers. I'm trying to understand how you see someone that possesses images of infants and toddlers being sexually violated, and you sentence them to 64 percent below what the prosecutor's asking for? You  --  you don't provide a justification other than a generic concern that the guidelines are too high. You don't provide a justification as required by statute. So I'm asking you to take the opportunity to explain to this committee and the American people why in 100 percent of the cases, you have people with vile crimes and you have language saying they're vile crimes, but then you sentence them to very, very low sentences. And why do you consistently  --  100 percent of the time choose to do that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, no one case can stand in for a judge's entire sentencing record. I've sentenced more than 100 people. You have eight or nine cases in that chart. TED CRUZ: Ok. Judge, you said that before. These are the eight or nine child porn cases. I will say to correct the record and  -- DICK DURBIN: Just say to the judge, there's no point in responding. He's going to interrupt you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you. TED CRUZ: Look, I appreciate the Chairman trying to filibuster, and if you don't like your witness's answers, you're welcome to provide your own. DICK DURBIN: [Off-mic] TED CRUZ: She is declining to answer the question. And Chairman Durbin, if you want to join her on this on the  --  on the bench, you can. But Chairman Durbin  -- DICK DURBIN: My job is to make  -- TED CRUZ: Chairman Durbin, I'm not interrupting your questioning. DICK DURBIN: I'm asking you to give her a chance to answer  -- TED CRUZ: But she's consistently said she's not going to answer. I want to clarify for the record, by the way, the case I was discussing was Cooper and not Chasen, but Chasen is the case that I was reading from your transcript was Cooper, but Chasen and I  --  let's get to Chasen and I pulled the wrong tab. Chasen is equally horrifying and you say in Chasen and that's something Senator Graham asked you. So the guidelines lay out different enhancements, and you say repeatedly, and this is true in all your cases, you say you disagree with the guidelines, you think they're wrong. And the two guidelines you disagree with is, one, there's an enhancement for use of a computer. And you say the world has changed. Now all of these are on a computer. And I understand that. I don't agree with you, but I understand that. That is a understandable thing to say. But the second thing you say over and over again, is there's an enhancement for the number of images. And you say repeatedly, for example, in  --  in Chasen, you say whatever the state of the law in technology at the time of the guidelines were first adapted. Neither the use of the computer nor the number of images are especially aggravating factors today. Now, I find that bizarre and you say it in every case, you say the number of images, it's not an aggravating factor, it doesn't matter, and you won't apply the enhancement. Do you really believe that  --  that a predator that has hundreds or thousands of images of hundreds or thousands of children being sexually violated has not committed an offense that  --  that is more serious than someone that has a single picture of a single child? A single picture of a single child is horrifying, but hundreds of children that have been violated, do you really believe that is not a more serious offense? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I did not have any cases involving hundreds of thousands of pictures. TED CRUZ: No, I said hundreds or thousands. You had  --  you had cases involving hundreds and you had cases involving thousands. You're right, you didn't have hundreds of thousands. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And I also applied an enhancement just not to the degree of the guidelines. TED CRUZ: You're right, it's a five point enhancement under the guidelines you provide two. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. So not zero  -- TED CRUZ: Ok, you're right. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  not the suggestion. TED CRUZ: But, are you suggesting the number of images, doesn't matter because you say it in court over and over again that the number of images doesn't reflect that it's a more serious crime. Do you really believe that? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, as I said to Senator Graham, the court is taking into account a number of circumstances. The commission has done a report about the operation of the guidelines, which enhancements actually reflect different levels of culpability with  -- TED CRUZ: So let me  --  and let me ask you, this Judge. You said the purpose of sentencing is to distinguish and distinguish between crimes that are not as serious from  --  from truly egregious crimes. Is that right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. TED CRUZ: So what is the purpose of sentencing if it's not to distinguish from less serious crimes from truly egregious crimes? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is to assign proportional punishment. It is to do justice in cases where you have defendants who are convicted of the same conduct, but have different  --  differing levels of culpability. TED CRUZ: Well, I will point out that you have a pattern it doesn't matter how egregious the case is. Senator Hawley talked about the Hawkins case where you had an 18 year old with pictures of boys as young as eight being sexually assaulted and raped. And you sentenced him to just three months in jail. And I will point out the Stewart case, the last one on this list, because we're running out of time. The Stewart case, you describe that he had over 6,700 images and videos. So that's a lot. 6,700. That's a lot of kids being sexually assaulted  -- DICK DURBIN: Time has expired, Senator. TED CRUZ: You have taken over a minute of my time, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: So you've been given extra time. You usually ask for it. You're given it. TED CRUZ: Ok. I  --  I know you want to interrupt. I know you don't like  -- DICK DURBIN: I just want you to play by the rules. TED CRUZ: I know you like to interrupt  -- DICK DURBIN: I like you to play by the rules. TED CRUZ: --  but you consumed a substantial question of my time in my questioning. And I'm going to ask my questions. And you can if you want to testify you're welcome to. DICK DURBIN: Senator  -- TED CRUZ: Judge  -- DICK DURBIN: You play by the same rules as every other Senator. TED CRUZ: --  in this  --  in the Stewart case. You said from the bench, thus, although this is not necessarily an atypical case, your child pornography possession crime was egregious in the court's view. Ok, So this is a bad one. If you're actually sentencing defendants, you said this was egregious. What did you sentence Stuart for? The guideline said 97-121 months? Prosecutors said 97 months. You said it's egregious. 6,700 images. You come in with 57  -- DICK DURBIN: Time is expired.[Crosstalk] TED CRUZ: in the Stewart case. Do you want to address that? Because you're claiming it's cherry picking. In fact, you're welcome to explain any of these cases, but let's take the Stewart case. DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. TED CRUZ: Why did you sentence him for half the amount? DICK DURBIN: You're not recognized, Senator. Senator Coons. TED CRUZ: You don't want her to answer that question? DICK DURBIN: You wouldn't allow her anyways. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, she may answer the question. I've asked her why she sentenced Stewart  -- DICK DURBIN: You've gone over the time Senator by two minutes  -- TED CRUZ: Why she's  -- DICK DURBIN: -- and a half. TED CRUZ: --  because you've interrupted me for two minutes. Mr. Chairman, will you allow her to answer the question or do you not want the American people to hear why with someone she described as an egregious  -- DICK DURBIN: There comes a point Senator where you get a little bit  -- TED CRUZ: Chairman Durbin, will you allow her to answer the question? DICK DURBIN: You won't allow her to answer. TED CRUZ: I  --  I will happily allow her to  --  the question is  -- [Crosstalk]  -- Stewart, an egregious child pornography possession  -- [Crosstalk]  --  requested by the prosecutor. DICK DURBIN: Please, Senator. TED CRUZ: Will you allow her to answer the question, Chairman Durbin? DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. TED CRUZ: Why are you not allowing her to answer the question? There's not another Senator here that you've not allowed her to answer the question. DICK DURBIN: You're finished. TED CRUZ: I'm not asking another question, but allow her to answer the question, Chairman Durbin. CHRISTOPHER COONS: Thank you. Chairman  -- TED CRUZ: Why do you not want the American people to know what happened in the Stewart case or any of these cases? Chairman Durbin, I've never seen the Chairman refuse to allow a witness to answer a question. [Gavel] You can bang it as loud as you want. DICK DURBIN: No, I can just tell you at some point you have to follow the rules. TED CRUZ: Ok. Will you let her answer the question? You've  --  you've been interrupting. And by the way, with Senator Graham, it went 10 minutes over. DICK DURBIN: [Inaudible] TED CRUZ: You've taken a big chunk of the time. Will you allow her to answer the question? DICK DURBIN: You've given her  -- TED CRUZ: Why are you afraid of her? She's welcome to answer it right now. Will you let her? DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. TED CRUZ: Will you  --  so no, you don't want her to answer the question? DICK DURBIN: Senator Coons. TED CRUZ: Will you let her answer the question? CHRISTOPHER COONS: Chairman Durbin  -- TED CRUZ: Apparently you are very afraid of the American people hearing the answer to that. CHRISTOPHER COONS: We here in the Senate, in this committee today are in the middle of a policy fight. It's my understanding that across this nation, more than 70 percent of district court judges who impose sentences in cases such as the ones that have been so vigorously debated here, depart downwards from the sentencing guidelines, from the request of the prosecutors. And as you've explained repeatedly and in detail, that's because a sentencing judge is required to weigh a whole series of factors. How many opinions have you written as a judge, Your Honor? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've written at least 570 opinions, Senator. CHRISTOPHER COONS: And in how many cases have you imposed sentences as a federal judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: More than 100 cases. CHRISTOPHER COONS: And across all of those, we've just heard very forcefully, assertions made about you and your character and your capabilities and your background, narrowing in on just a few. [*]CHRISTOPHER COONS: And I would simply put for those who are watching and trying to understand what all of this is about that in an attempt to distract from your broad support, your deep record, your outstanding intellectual and legal credentials that we are taking what is a policy dispute that should be decided by members of the Senate. If we want to change the sentencing guidelines to make them mandatory rather than advisory, if we want to change the structure within which a federal judge imposes sentences, we could do that. But to demand that you be held accountable for this practice that is nationwide and is years old, I view as an unfair misrepresentation of your record. So if I could, let's go to something that you did as the Vice Chair of the Sentencing Commission, an important vote that you took in 2014. Because in my view, it shows how fundamentally misguided are the attacks that try to characterize you as someone who at all costs will do what you can to help criminal defendants. Let me just lay out the context for a moment. In 2010 Congress, enacting a policy choice, unanimously passed the Fair Sentencing Act, a bill that reduced the disparity in sentences between crack cocaine and powdered cocaine from 101 to 18 to one. And the Sentencing Commission unanimously concluded this law meant those currently in prison on crack offenses could seek to shorten their sentences. Four years later, the commission further concluded that individuals who provided substantial assistance to the government, people who cooperated, who helped out the prosecution could use this law to shorten their sentence retroactively beyond any break they might have gotten for their cooperation. But you disagreed. In your public remarks at the time you explained that although given your prior service as a federal public defender, it might seem logical you would support this direction. You could not do so because you concluded it was manifestly inconsistent with the law and would create unfair disparities between those previously sentenced cooperators and those sentenced today. Essentially, if I understand your view, it was that the sentence of a cooperator shouldn't be understood to be based on the sentencing ranges modified by the Fair Sentencing Act, but was best understood as a fixed discount of the mandatory minimum that a Fair Sentencing Act had not changed. I know this is technical, but I just wanted to make sure I'm characterizing this correctly before reaching a conclusion. Do I understand the context correctly in which you made this decision? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, perfectly. It  --  it was a debate among the commission, one of the very few in which we couldn't reach agreement about the retroactive application of the Fair Sentencing Act reduction. CHRISTOPHER COONS: And so just to finish the framing, the Sentencing Commission which often decides things unanimously was sharply divided. And here's who was on each side. You voted to deny relief to cooperators, to deny them a pathway towards reducing their prison sentences. And you were joined by two conservatives well-known to us, Judge William Pryor and now Judge Dabney Friedrich. And the three of you were outvoted by four commissioners, which included Judge Hinojosa, an individual nominated by President Reagan and described as a hardnosed no nonsense judicial conservative who was on the other side of the argument from you. So you've got four commissioners including an outstanding conservative Reagan nominee. And they thought the law could be interpreted to give a break on sentencing. And you were on the other side of that argument. If as someone has tried to paint you, you simply were determined to give every break you could to criminal defendants, all you had to do was join the majority and this would have passed. But that's not what you did. Help me understand why not. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As you say, this was a sort of technical kind of in the weeds discussion. But the top line is that when I looked at the issues and I looked at the law, it was my opinion that the law did not provide for the further reduction that was being considered. CHRISTOPHER COONS: So across an incredibly broad range of sentences you've had to impose in cases on which you've had to opine, I'm picking this one in part because it's not getting any attention in this confirmation process. But for folks who'd like some insight into how you make decisions and how you explain those decisions, there's a video  --  it's publicly available  --  of your April 2014 of the public meeting of the Sentencing Commission where you laid out your position. So I encourage folks to just watch that. And they'll see a jurist who understands that her commitment above all is to determine what the law requires and then follow it. In my view, that's an individual who belongs on the Supreme Court. By the way, your position that the law required that there not be further breaks given in this context ultimately won the day. My colleague from New Jersey made a point of mentioning a relevant case, United States versus Booker yesterday. I have to say that in this case, it was decided in Koons versus United States, with a K not a C. [Laughter] Look, we all have our judicial record from which we work. But the Supreme Court ruled for exactly the same reasons you did in this argument that was made public. So I  --  I just think, your Honor, this is an example of you looking hard at the law, making a tough decision, ultimately being vindicated in that decision. But taking a position that is not the caricature that's been proffered by some of you. Yesterday, I  --  I ran through a number of the  --  the letters and statements that debunk some of the attacks that have been levied based on a handful of sentencing decisions. There was the National Review piece by a conservative former prosecutor who calls out the smear on your sentencing practices in cases involving child pornography. The statement by the Fraternal Order of Police and the International Association of Chiefs of Police endorsing your evenhanded and judicious approach to the law. The glowing letter from 24 prominent conservative attorneys, and the resounding recommendation we heard in person from Judge Griffith. There's also been received here a letter from a number of retired federal judges including two Republican nominees rejecting this mischaracterization of your sentencing record. As I've said, this is a policy dispute that we should be deciding, not an appropriate basis on which to mischaracterize your record or your character. We have letters from the National Coalition of Domestic Violence in addition to these law enforcement leaders from survivors, advocates, crime victims. The breadth of your support from the very communities my colleagues have suggested you're making less safe shows just how off base these attacks are and in my view is a testament to your qualities and qualifications. So we all agree  --  all of us  --  that it's critical to protect our children and prevent the kinds of heinous crimes we've heard about in some detail earlier today. It's why I'm introducing a bipartisan reauthorization of the Victims of Child Abuse Act, something that we could act on as a committee to do our job, which is set policy and pass laws. But I also frankly think we need to be mindful that we are asking of you to get engaged in that policy dispute in front of this committee, which is not the role of a judge, something you well understand. let me turn, if I could, to another reason I think you're deeply qualified and that you will bring something important to the Supreme Court. Bryan Stevenson, one of America's leading civil rights lawyers and by happy coincidence a Delaware native, has spoken about how achieving justice requires being proximate to the people most impacted by the criminal justice system. And you've done that. As a public defender, you've represented individuals and the criminal justice system. As a district court judge, you have looked individuals in the eye and told them that for their crimes against society, they will spend years or decades in prison. You have met with, fought for, and advocated for victims. You've also studied the big picture. As an effective and engaged member of the Sentencing Commission, you've pored over data, reviewed thousands of letters, and thought hard about the appropriate national approach to just punishment in a more policy oriented role. You've also thought about the big picture as a judge when considering the precedent that your opinions set. I'd be interested briefly in how your experience on the Sentencing Commission shaped your approach as a district court judge and how the interplay of all these factors might shape or contribute to your decisions as a Supreme Court justice. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. One of the things district judges  --  sentencing judges often say when asked about the task is that sentencing is the hardest thing that a judge has to do. And it's in part for the reasons that you have articulated. That it's one thing to understand the law, to read it in a book. It's one thing to look at data and numbers and  --  and make policy based on that. [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It's quite another to have someone in the courtroom whether as a victim of crime or a defendant who's perpetate  --  perpetrated a crime and have to decide how to proceed and pronounce sentence on that individual. The work that I did on the sentencing commission, which was prior to my becoming a district judge, I think enabled me to understand unwarranted sentencing disparities to understand some of the policy reasons behind the guidelines and to make the kinds of evaluations that the law now requires since the guidelines are no longer mandatory. And I feel -- felt -- I felt better in a sense about the task of calculating the guidelines, which is what courts have to do at the beginning of a sentence. They can be a little complex. And having been on the sentencing commission, I think that helped, and some of these cases do make their way to the Supreme Court. So --  So I think that I am prepared to handle the cases that involve sentencing that  --  that do go to the court. CHRISTOPHER COONS: In preparing for this confirmation, I went back and read a lecture you gave, but it was later published in the Harvard Law Review about the balance, the challenge of sentencing about that moment. I had the joy, the blessing of clerking for a judge on the Third Circuit. I  --  my legal skills and talents did not allow me the opportunity to clerk for the Supreme Court as you did, but  --  and also the district court and also the circuit court. But I clerked for a judge who I first met when she was a district court judge and imposing a sentence on someone who was a crack dealer. And she did a remarkable job of speaking to the victims, speaking to the community, speaking to the prosecutor, and the defense attorney and then speaking directly to the defendant and imposing a very long sentence. And as I got to know her later, I recognized that, you know, as a member of our community and as someone who saw the importance of that moment, that public moment of helping the defendant understand what they'd done so that they might somehow change, but also helping the victims understand what had happened that she took that very seriously, incredibly seriously. In the Harvard Law Review publication of your remarks, you said that you're persuaded by the theories of punishment that except all human beings are responsible moral agents and you view punishment as a necessary consequence of the defendant's decision to engage in criminal behavior. You also went on to say that the challenge is balancing the acknowledgment. All of us are more than just the worst thing we've ever done, but there is a need to ensure the defendant is adequately addressed and punished. What I think you say in that lecture, what you've shown across the arc of your public service reveals someone who understands the appropriate need for punishment in our society, but who is also striving to follow the balance of recommendations, guidelines, statute and the context and facts. And I trust that as members of this committee and the Senate as a whole and the general public take the time which they should do to give a fair reading to the whole scope and arc and reach of your service that they will see you as someone who cares deeply about our constitution and the rights that make us free as you said in your opening statement. Your career in the law, your service on the bench, your thoughtful responses to questions put to you the way you've maintained your composure all impressed me. As I mentioned, I don't think labels such as a judicial philosophy are always that meaningful or dispositive. I think in your case, a deep admiration for the constitution and an understanding that the role of a judge is a limited one are critical and qualifying. You opened yesterday by referencing how your parents were educated in racially segregated schools in Florida, but how you just one generation later were raised in integrated schools and had far greater opportunities to put your evident, God given talents to work in service to our nation. You cited this one generation change as an example of the greatness of America. Of course, the Supreme Court played a central role in more correctly interpreting the constitution and applying it in a manner that allowed this reversal of unjust law to occur. I think the experiences of your own family and your connection to the experiences of trailblazers who came before you and who shoulders you stand has meaningfully shaped what kind of a justice you will be. I think you know in your bones how important our Constitution and the rule of law is. And I think as someone who served on the Sentencing Commission, a public defender and the trial court, an appellate court judge, you have the ability to see across the whole scope and reach of how the law impacts families, communities, and our nation. Last, in some ways, I think most importantly, I've learned that as a person and a judge, you have humility, Judge Griffith, who came before this committee to introduce you and scores of others we've heard from  --  I've just referenced, have lauded your practice of judicial restraint. And you've said a core component of your philosophy is your understanding that the judge's role is a limited one. Well, I think restraint is a core part of your approach to decision making, partly because you are a judge who is humble enough to know that the Constitution and the laws passed by Congress say what the law is. The judge has a limited role in deciding questions of law based on facts presented. Penn law professor, Lisa Fairfax, your other introducer, your dear friend, explained that since college at Harvard and then through law school, you've been a mentor and a role model. She praised your warmth and intelligence, your devotion to friends and family, but she also mentioned your humility. She knew you were honored and humbled by the significance of this moment, not what it means for you, but what it means for our nation. I remember thinking about this on Monday and I had a chance to talk to your brother, Ketajh, and he mentioned that he knew you were destined for this moment your whole life. I'm sure he would say you've been exceptional since you were student body President at Palmetto High School. I suspect your wonderful family upbringing is partly responsible for this facet of your character. I suspect your faith has played a role in sustaining you as mine does and so does many others in this room. I've often found instruction and comfort in the verse, what does the Lord require of you, but to do Justice, love mercy and walk humbly with your God. I'm not going to ask you to reflect on that verse, Your Honor, but I wouldn't be surprised if it's one of your favorites that sustains you. Let me close by returning to what Judge Griffith said when he told us in his heartfelt introduction of you on Monday and something you've also shown in the hours you've been grilled by this body. He'd already written a letter to this committee delivering his endorsement. He took the extra step to then amplify it in person and he did so because of confidence in you and because he was delivering a message to us as a committee that Supreme Court confirmations should be more than just exercises in partisan tribalism. He said there should be nothing unusual about a judge who just happened to be appointed by a Republican President and who holds conservative legal views coming forward to support a nominee with your impeccable qualifications and character, especially a nominee whose legal opinions, whose actions and decisions as a judge he was in a position to review for years given that you were a district court judge and he was a circuit court judge. Look, our confirmation hearings for justices have sadly been devolving over many years into longer and longer exercises of partisan politics, punctuated by just brief glimpses and occasional thoughtful examinations of a nominee's judicial decision making and views on the constitution, which should properly be our main focus. I have to believe this sad state of affairs, troubles, my colleagues of both sides and all who watch this. But as I reflect on these hearings, I'm hopeful that your gracious thoughtful exchanges with some members will be remembered as just one more service you've rendered to our nation. And I hope some watching these hearings will be reminded that even though we disagree with the policy preferences or opinions of a nominee, we should all recognize when a nominee is fundamentally qualified, deeply committed to the constitution role  --  rule of law and a person of great Character. Judge Griffith reminded us at the outset of this week, and I quote As Justice Scalia taught us for so long an indispensable feature of the republic, the constitution created is an independent judiciary of judges who've taken an oath not to a President or a party but to the American people and to God that they will be impartial. I couldn't agree more with Judge Griffith. You've demonstrated your unwavering commitment to that oath in your impartiality and your abundant qualifications. It will be my honor to support your confirmation for associate justice. With that, Mr. Chair, I yield. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Coons, the Senator from Nebraska, Senator Sasse. BEN SASSE: Thanks, Chairman Durbin. Judge, welcome back. I'd like to associate myself with parts of what Chris said there in his closing. I would differ with him about whether or not getting to precision on judicial philosophy matters, but you know that you and I've been wrestling about it for a couple of weeks. But I'd like to affirm, Chris this point about the beauty of the hymn to America you told and through the eyes of your parents and that that changes the growth in the country over the course of the last two generations. And The Wall Street Journal had an editorial this morning that said pretty much the same thing as Chris just said, which is that the hymn to America that you gave in your opening on Monday afternoon and some of your comments yesterday were inspiring and beautiful.  [*]BEN SASSE: So I associate myself with Senator Coons on that. I'd like to talk a little bit about your time as a judge and particularly how you see development and -- and growth and change over that time. So take us back nine years and then maybe five years ago and then today. How has your approach to being a judge changed from year one to year five to today? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I do think there was a little bit of growth. I hope there was a little bit of growth. Certainly in year one and year five I was still a district judge and both of those years differ dramatically from my work as an appellate judge, which is where I'm currently stationed. In every job in year one you're new, you're trying to figure things out. I don't know that I had quite pinned down at the very beginning exactly how I would approach cases. But by the time I got to year five, I think I had a really good sense of this judging thing and was able to demonstrate in my opinions -- the many, many opinions that I've written  --  the way in which I go about making my decisions. I was able to demonstrate clearly I think that the particular parties in the case, the issues in the case, what it's about from a standpoint of personal preference is not an issue. I'm setting those things aside. I am ruling from a position of neutrality and trying to determine in every case what the law requires. I am looking at only the facts and the law in the case. I'm evaluating the arguments of the parties and if it's statutory interpretation, I'm trying to ascertain what Congress has intended. I am committed, I think my record shows, to the understanding that that is the role and the only appropriate role for a judge. BEN SASSE: I'd like to talk a little bit about the troubling pattern we see on law school campuses and across higher education more broadly, especially in the last five years. There's obviously a trend toward shouting down and canceling opinions that are outside the left leaning mainstream. Calls for firing professors, canceling professors, shouting down and sometimes threatening speakers who bring divergent  --  diverse opinions. Calls to discipline fellow students. These tactics are increasingly commonplace, particularly against conservative speakers and professors and students, but also increasingly against traditional liberals. I'm a former college President and one of the sort of oddities that doesn't fit inside the tribalism of how a lot of times media covers things in DC, one of the oddities for me is how often I have liberal professors reaching out to me saying that their experience on campus is becoming much less interesting, that the divide on American political campuses is less and less conservative policy leaning versus liberal or progressive policy leaning. But more and more liberal versus illiberal. And I think these campaigns are obviously deeply problematic. They shut down debate rather than teaching students how to engage ideas that they might not have encountered before, which is also a pretty decent definition of education. If you already knew everything before you ever encountered a new idea, you wouldn't need to write checks or take time off of productive life. So there's obviously a tendency in response for students to self-censor rather than learn from each other. And this robs students of the chance to engage with ideas from across the political spectrum. But in particular, in law schools, it robs students of the opportunity to learn how to consider an alternate po  --  position and argue a different point of view than they might have had. So given that you're a debate champion in earlier days as well, I'd like to ask if you agree that law students should be engaging with ideas from across the political spectrum, even those they disagree with rather than trying to shun those different ideas. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Let me just say in part because these issues are things that could implicate matters that come before the courts I will just say that as a general matter, law school, like many schools is a place where ideas and perspectives are considered. And in the law, as I've said, it's important for the judge who's making the decision to have different arguments. And so one of the things that traditionally happens in law schools is that you are trained in law to make arguments that are at times not even the arguments that you personally agree with, because the understanding is that in litigation, in disputes that come before the court, the court is going to want to hear from different viewpoints. So in that sense, the  --  the essence of legal instruction is to have different arguments being made because that model's in great part what happens in a courtroom. BEN SASSE: I'm  --  I really am not trying to ask any kind of gotcha question here  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yes  -- BEN SASSE: --  I suspect we highly agree. So I don't understand the qualification you put at the beginning. There's no sort of second order fork on my question. It is better to debate ideas that you disagree with than shut them down, isn't it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It is better in law schools to make sure that there are ideas from all perspectives. And in order to have that happen they can't be suppressed. BEN SASSE: So you  --  you don't want students shouting down other students or visiting professors, right? I mean, I'm  --  honestly, I didn't think there was any chance we would differ on this. So I'm not  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  No, I'm not  --  I'm not suggesting that we do differ  -- BEN SASSE: --  You're against canceling people, I assume. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  am not  --  I'm not suggesting that we differ. What I'm  --  what I'm saying is that these issues about speech on campus and the like are the kinds of things that are issues that are working their way, you know, in different formats in different ways through the courts  -- BEN SASSE: --  Gotcha  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  And so I'm just being careful in terms of my  --  my answers. BEN SASSE: Okay, I'm  --  I'm  --  I'm trying to lead you because I want to  --  because I think American civic health will be better off  --  you're going to be a hero. You are already a hero to lots and lots of kids, students maybe some bound for the law, but more broadly students across the country. And I think it's in America's public interest for them to hear you as an advocate for the full vigorous strong kid debate of different views. And so I'm  --  I suspect you are an advocate for vigorous and robust debate. I don't see how you might be constrained against saying that because of future cases, but I'm going to just assume were mostly aligned on this. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I  --  I think that's a fair assumption. BEN SASSE: Thank you. I do want to make  --  before I move on just because we've had a number of members of this committee comment on cameras in the court. I've made my position on this clear a lot of times. But if  --  if I can give a tiny bit of friend of the court brief in advance, because I think it  --  when  --  when you're on the court and you all continue to debate this issue I think it should be a decision for the Supreme Court to make about whether or not there are cameras in the courtroom, not a decision for the article one branch to make for article three. But I think it's incredibly important for us to recognize  --  cause I  --  I think I differ from a lot of my colleagues on this who are advocates for cameras in the courtroom. I get their position that transparency is a virtue. Transparency is a good thing. I also believe that pen and pad can facilitate a whole heck of a lot of transparency just fine. And it's healthy for Americans to recognize the second and third and fourth order effects of cameras. A huge part of why this institution doesn't work well is because we have cameras everywhere. Cameras change human behavior. We know this. You don't have the same kinds of conversation over the dinner table with your family when you're wrestling through issues and apologizing for something and saying I said this before, but maybe I should modify what I said. I was  --  my tone was jerky. My substance didn't account for your position. There's a whole bunch of things that humans can do if they're not immediately mindful of some distant camera audience that they might be trying to create a soundbite for. And Instagram can be useful for some small things, but for intellectual discourse it is not a friend. And I think we should recognize that the jackassery we often see around here is partly because of people mugging for short term camera opportunities. And it is definitely a second, third, and fourth order effect that the court should think through before it has advocates in there who are not only trying to persuade you nine justices but also trying to get on cable that night or create a viral video. So for what it's worth, I hope that the court doesn't respond to some well-meaning impulses from the Congress to  --  to push for cameras in the courtroom, but also some  --  some bullying. And there are  --  there are ways that you can get to a lot of transparency. Audio recordings are increasingly released  but I think that a judicial philosophy of some kind is necessarily an input into your judicial methodology and into every Justice's actual jurisprudence on the court. And that's why I think it's important for us to unpack that because the philosophies that you've outlined for the committee, again, I think yesterday's back and forth that you and I had on Breyer v Scalia is important and you wouldn't claim any of those philosophies for yourself.And yet, I think the philosophies ultimately instruct judges on the sources and the tools they consult, on how they discern intent, on whether the Constitution is protecting specific limited and defined principles or more general values, and whether modern values can be used to infuse our understanding of the Constitution.So again, when you narrated a bit of the debate between Justice Breyer, I know you've got lots of intellectual inputs in life, but you've credited him as a -- as a brilliant jurist and role model before, and the Scalia debates, you didn't really tell us who you thought got the better of the argument. And so I think throughout these two days you focused a lot on what the Supreme Court has said,and I think that is helpful and important, but I've been also trying to get at what you think the limits might be on what Justice Jackson would be constrained by. So I feel like -- I believe we still haven't heard your judicial philosophy and I wish I'd made more progress with you on that. But what we do know on a personal note is that these committee three days have been very long,and I want to thank you and got to have a nice conversation with your parents earlier -- your whole family, for what you've endured and for spending time with us and obviously wish best wishes to you and your family. Thank you, Judge.KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Thank you.DICK DURBIN:One more minute. Thank you, Senator Sasse. And Senator Blumenthal is next.RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Good afternoon. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:Judge Jackson, I know your birthday, September 14th. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Yes, sir. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:You have the happy coincidence of a birthday with Constance Baker Motley. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Yes, sir. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:Who just happens to have been born in New Haven, Connecticut.KETANJI BROWN JACKSON:Ah. [laughter]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL:And we're very proud that she is a daughter of New Haven and Connecticut.And she is one of my heroes as well. As you know about her, she was the first Black woman appointed to the federal bench. She is the first black woman to have argued before the United States Supreme Court. In fact, her record before the court was ten wins and zero losses. She was very predominantly responsible for Brown versus Board of Education.Thurgood Marshall got most of the credit, but she did a lot of the work. Probably sounds familiar to you. [laughter] So why don't you tell us and maybe tell those folks, particularly women and girls who are watching or listening, why you said at the outset of the hearings here that she was one of those whose shoulders you stood upon as you came here today?[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. Well, in addition to the fact that we share a birthday, which I discovered when I was in law school, and thought what a happy coincidence in terms of someone who I so admired. And secretly at that point, I was thinking maybe I might want to be a judge. So it was a wonderful -- wonderful coincidence. I so admired the fact that she was the first. It's not -- it's not necessarily easy to be the first, but it -- it is an opportunity to show other people what is possible. When you're the first, it means no one has ever done it before like you. And there may be hundreds, thousands of people who might have wanted that opportunity and thought I can't do that because there's no one there like me. And so being a trailblazer, whether it's Judge Motley or Justice Marshall or Justice O'Connor being a trailblazer is  --  is really inspiring I think. And  --  and I was always moved by Judge Motley's experience and  --  and think it may even be part of why I moved in this direction. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Well, it is inspiring. And I hope that your very inspiring story will make it possible for a lot of others to think it not secretly, but say it out loud and aspire to it. Because it's what this country needs. And fortunately, President Biden has recognized it in the nominees that he's put before us. And we've tried to work with the great leadership of Senator Durbin to confirm people of real merit, the kind of qualifications and intellect and character and depth and warmth that you bring to us today. I want to talk a little bit about voting rights because part of the reason why those dreams now are realities is that more people have the right to vote, at least until recently. In fact, there has been a lot of backsliding about turning back the clock on voting rights. The gentleman sitting behind you, Doug Jones, our former colleague whom we very much respect and admire, wrote a tribute to Vivian Malone Jones, who has a rich story as a civil rights warrior and who succeeded John Lewis as head of the Voter Rights Project. And he said in a speech that Doug Jones wrote in tribute to her as she was inducted posthumously into the Alabama Women's Hall of Fame, I'm quoting, "We can best honor her by acknowledging that while most doors are unlocked today, they are still heavy and so hard to open for so, so many people in Alabama and the rest of the nation." Let us commit ourselves to do our part to open these doors as wide as possible so that everyone can take the walk that Vivian took. I'm going to ask that former Senator Jones' full speech be entered in the record, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Thank you. The simple fact of the matter is, Judge Jackson, Congress passed the Voting Rights Act in 1965. It was a source of real power to so many people who got the right to vote for the first time in practical terms, cause it struck down more than 1,000 discriminatory election rules proposed by state and local officials. It opened the ballot box to millions and millions of Americans, and it became regarded as the crown jewel of the civil rights movement. And then just in the last few years, the Supreme Court has hacked away at it in an exercise of judicial activism that has been historic in magnitude. Judges supplanting their views for the policy preferences and official acts of legislatures in opinions that were written and joined by only conservative justices. These decisions were about as far from judicial restraint as they could possibly be. Na  --  not even close. And they rewrote the rules of our most cherished and most bipartisan civil rights laws. You know the cases: Shelby County, Brnovich versus the Democratic National Committee. In effect, their opinions including Justice Alito's decision in Brnovich are completely untethered from the clear statutory text and they impose a series of so  --  so-called guideposts on section two that create unreasonably high hurdles to the exercise of the Voting Rights Act. I hope that you will bring to the court that deliberate careful methodology that you described earlier very convincingly. It is part of your judicial philosophy in the sense that it's your approach to casesh. And it has been very persuasively and clearly articulated. And I think if that kind of deliberate and careful methodology had prevailed on the United States Supreme Court, we would still have the Voting Rights Act in full right now. And I hope that we can once again return to bipartisan support of those rights. The most recent exercise of unfortunate decision making in the voting rights area came just hours ago when the Supreme Court struck down the decision of the Wisconsin state Supreme Court in Wisconsin Legislature versus Wisconsin Elections Commission. What is striking is not only the result but the fact that it was done as part of the shadow docket. We've talked a lot about it here. And what the people of America could  --  should know is there's no oral argument. There's only minimal briefing. There are no full opinions of the court. In fact, I'm holding up a per curiam opinion  --  it is about 12 pages in length  --  from the court. Which means you don't know who wrote it. And there is a powerful dissent. I recommend that everyone read it. Again, use of the shadow docket has become increasingly prevalent since 2017 and in effect the United States Supreme Court is shirking its duty. I hope you will bring to the court the kind of responsible and methodical approach to decision making that will lead to an avoidance of the shadow docket as well as a return to the Voting Rights Act. And if I can just offer one more piece of advice on the court's workload, I have a chart. I know we're not going by the rules of evidence here. But this chart indicates the signed decisions of the United States Supreme Court over a good part of its history. And I think the pattern here is pretty clear. The Court issues fewer signed opinions, in fact it has declined precipitously since 1972. This little blip at the end here is an increase from 53 to 57. But you can see it's only a fraction of what the court used to do in signed opinions, even from the time when I was a law clerk it's diminished profoundly. [*]RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: The Supreme Court needs to do its job. It needs to issue signed opinions, not this shadow docket. It needs to take cases and resolve real fundamental important issues. And  taking your record 573 opinions over nine years, I'm not a math major, but that's about 64 opinions a year. That's a lot more than they do, all nine of them. So I hope you will bring the energy that you have demonstrated in this room, the energy and the work ethic to the United States Supreme Court because clearly you have both, and I think the court is very much in need of it as it is some of the other great qualities, intellect, character that you have demonstrated here. Just a couple more points if I may. You were asked earlier about dissent. I want to ask you about one in particular, the dissent of your mentor and your predecessor on the court, Justice Breyer. I am told, I think I've read that there is one opinion that he is proudest of. Could you tell us what you recall it being if you know? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not able to answer that question. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: Well, I think he said that the dissent that he is proudest of was in parents involved in community schools versus Seattle school district. I think he said it was the opinion that he was proudest of and he cited it In a Harvard Law School symposium about his notable opinions and he said this dissent was most notable. I will give you this citation when we're done and asked that it be entered into the record, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Without objection. RICHARD BLUMENTHAL: It's 77 pages long, and it's a dissent. It's a dissent in that parents involved case which was a five-justice plurality invalidating public school integration plans In Seattle and Louisville. The plans have been in place for decades, put in place by two local school boards voluntarily trying to address school segregation in public schools in both of those cities. And the justices  --  conservative justices striking down the school integration plans said in effect they couldn't move forward with those integration plans. You may recall it is the opinion where Chief Justice Roberts said very famously, the way to stop discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discrimination  -- stop discriminating on the basis of race. Justice Breyer in dissent, which reminded me of a lot of what you've said here this week wrote quote, I do not claim to know how best to stop harmful discrimination, how best to create a society that includes all Americans, how best to overcome our serious problems of increasing de facto, Segregation. But as a judge, I do know that the Constitution does not authorize judges to dictate solutions to these problem. Rather the Constitution creates a democratic political system through which the people themselves through their legislators must find  --  must together find answers. The court should leave them to their work. I think that's the philosophy that you've articulated here today. The judicial philosophy of separate branches of government as you so eloquently described, our constitutional scheme, our federalism, that really should have led the court to respect the Wisconsin Supreme Court's decision and the Wisconsin governor's decision and to stay in its lane as you have put it so well. The fact is there has been a lot of progress and we see it in this hearing room, but there is a lot of work still to be done and there's a lot of reason for folks to feel even some anger at what we've seen on voting rights and on resegregation in some areas. So I am really excited as I've indicated and joyful at the great landmark and the historic accomplishment that your nomination represents and reflects. And I hope, as I've said that not only will you make the court look more like America, but hopefully think more like America. And I want to thank you for your very hard work, all of what you personally have done because you as a person at done it, and history has given you this opportunity. Your parents have helped to make it possible. Your family's story is so powerful, but you've really earned it And We're grateful to you for providing all of us that role model. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Thank you. Senator Blumenthal. Senator Hawley. JOSH HAWLEY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, good to see you again. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Good to see you, Senator. JOSH HAWLEY: You don't have a lot of time, so let me just get straight into it. Senator Cruz was asking you at the end of  --  of his time and questionings about United States versus Stewart. This is the case where Neil Stewart tried to cross state lines to rape another person's nine-year-old daughter. He had 6,700 images and videos of egregious and brutal child pornography. The government recommended 97 months, The guidelines said 97 to 121 months. You came in at 57 months. Senator Cruz asked you why, the chairman wouldn't let  --  let you answer. I thought maybe you'd like to answer now. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, senator. No one case can stand in for a judge's entire record. I have sentenced more than 100 people in a variety of egregious circumstances in every case and especially cases that involve the kinds of acts that you're talking about, the kinds of evidence that I had to deal with as a judge. In every case, I am balancing the factors that Congress has determined are appropriate and required for a judge to make a determination. The data points that Senator Cruz pointed to that you may have in front of you don't account for all of the information that was before me as a judge and the authority that you all Congress in your prior confirmation, when I was a district judge provided for me to exercise my judgment. And I treated those cases and every case very seriously and imposed a sentence that was sufficient but not greater than necessary to promote the purposes of punishment. JOSH HAWLEY: Would it surprise you to learn that Mr. Stewart is a recidivist? He was  --  warrants issued again for his arrest, just three years after your sentencing? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Would it surprised me? JOSH HAWLEY: Yes, would it surprise you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: You know, Senator, there is data in the Sentencing Commission and elsewhere that indicates that there are recidivism  --  serious recidivism issues. And so among the various people that I've sentenced, I'm not surprised that there are people who re-offend and it is a terrible thing that happens in our system. JOSH HAWLEY: Yeah, indeed it is. Let me ask you about the Hawkins case. You and I talked about this yesterday. You've been able to think about it overnight. This is a case where you had an 18-year-old who possessed and distributed hundreds of images of eight-year-olds and nine-year-olds and ten-year-olds, and you gave him frankly a slap on the wrist since of three months. Do you regret it? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator I don't remember whether it was distribution or possession. In the law  -- JOSH HAWLEY: It was both. Do you regret it?[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: In  --  in the law, there are different crime -- times that people -- JOSH HAWLEY: Judge, you gave him three months. My question is do you regret it or not? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, what I regret is that in a hearing about my qualifications to be a Justice on the Supreme Court, we've spent a lot of time focusing on this small subset of my sentences. And I've tried to explain -- JOSH HAWLEY: You regret that we're focusing on your cases? I don't understand. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, no, no. I'm  --  I'm talking about the fact that you're talking about  -- JOSH HAWLEY: Child pornography cases? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very serious cases. JOSH HAWLEY: I'm glad we agree on that. Don't you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Some -- some  --  some of which  --  Some  --  some of which  --  some of which involve conduct that I sentenced people to 25, 30 years  -- JOSH HAWLEY: Three months in this case. Judge, do you regret it? You haven't answered my question. Do you regret the sentence? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I would have to look at the circumstances. What I'm telling you  -- JOSH HAWLEY: You know, the circumstances. We discussed it for half an hour yesterday. There's a 55 page transcript, which I'm sure you've read. You've lived it, as you've emphasized to this committee over and over. You've lived it. Right? You said that you've been through all of this. You've looked at all of the images. You're the one who's had to endure all of it. You gave him a three month sentence. I just wonder if you regret it or if you stand by it? I mean do you stand by that sentence? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, in every case I followed what Congress authorized me to do in looking to the best of my ability at all of the various factors that apply, that constrain judges, that give us discretion, but also tell us how to sentence. And I ruled in every case based on all of the relevant factors. JOSH HAWLEY: So you don't regret it. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No one case Senator can stand in for  -- JOSH HAWLEY: I'm not asking you that. I'm asking if you regret this sentence in this case. And it sounds like the answer is no. But I want to tell you, I regret it. I regret that you gave him only three months. Let me read to you what you said about these kinds of cases. In fact of this defendant, you said, make no mistake, Mr. Hawkins, the children you saw in those pictures were not willing participants in the conduct that you witnessed. They were being forced to commit unspeakable acts of sexual violence for the pleasure of the person who was filming and for the gratification of sick people everywhere. People who apparently have no shred of empathy for what this must be doing to the children who are being abused in this way. You go on, some of the children you saw in those pictures will never  --  never have an adult  --  a normal adult relationship. Some of them will turn to drugs and prostitution and other vices to try to deal emotionally with the pain that results from the torture that they have experienced. And even those who manage to lead a somewhat normal adult life, say they live in constant fear of being recognized. Some people are even unable to leave their houses because once those pictures are on the Internet, they are there forever. And the victims can't do anything without worrying that every person that they meet has seen them in their most vulnerable state, at the most horrible time in their lives. That's your words. Pages 34 and 35 of the transcript. Powerful words, Judge. I just don't understand why, after saying this and believing this, you could give this guy three months in prison when the probation office that we've heard so much about recommended 18 months, even the probation office recommended 18 months. Do you have anything to add? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. JOSH HAWLEY: Let me ask you about your policy of not giving enhancements when there are pre-pubescent children like there were in the Hawkins case who are eight, nine, ten years old, when there are prepubescent children involved? I don't  --  I'm just struggling to understand this. You said it in Hawkins, you said that you weren't going to give him an enhancement. You weren't going to give him  --  make his sentence any tougher despite the fact that we had all of these terrible videos that you and I talked about at length yesterday. This is page 38 of the transcript just so that we're all following along. You said in your case, I don't feel that it is appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer  -- and we've talked about that  --  or the number of images or prepubescent victims as the guidelines require because these circumstances exist in many cases, if not most, and they don't signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. You said the same thing in the Cooper case just last year. This was an individual, Cooper who was 30 years old at the time of his sentencing. He pleaded guilty to distributing child pornography. He posted between three and four dozen images of child exploitation to Tumblr, where it could be accessed publicly. The government said, and I'll quote from the transcript in that case, page 37, when his devices were found, including the computer, within the computer and on an untitled folder were many, many, many videos. The nature of these videos went well beyond mere child pornography. The government says, I don't mean to make light of the content of any child pornography, but rather to say that the content of those videos is on the more egregious or extreme spectrum of the child pornography videos that are encountered in these cases. And yet, when you sentenced him, you said I'm quoting now from the transcript in Cooper, I'm really reluctant to get into the nature of the porn. And then later, it's very difficult to assess how different Mr. Cooper's images are than those of other similarly situated child pornography dependent  -- defendants rather, such that I  --  without going into looking at them, and I'm not an expert, you say. So, you say, while I understand the government's arguments, Mr. Miranda, the government's arguments in that regard, I don't find them persuasive from the standpoint of characterizing this as an especially egregious child pornography offense. Help me understand this, Judge. Why is it that you  --  what's your policy disagreement with the guidelines treating images, videos, porn  --  pornographic images that have small children, infants, seven, eight, nine year olds? Why won't you give an enhancement for those? Help me understand that. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I'll make two responses. First, that's not my policy disagreement. I don't know why you've characterized that in that way  -- JOSH HAWLEY: Well, wait a minute. Wait a minute. You say right here in the cases, I mean this is  --  this is what I want to get  --  I want to make sure that we're talking about the same thing here. This  --  in the Hawkins case, I don't feel that it's appropriate necessarily to increase the penalty on the basis of your use of a computer or the number of images or pre-pubescent victims. And you say the same thing in Cooper. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, two observations. One, I am sentencing in every case, I have policy disagreements with certain aspects of the operation of the guidelines that I lay out in every case as Congress has required and as the Supreme Court permits. In light of my experience, not only as a district judge, but also on the Sentencing Commission, which did a report about the operation of the guidelines. Second, you've read extensively from the government's argument in this case. You've not provided information from the probation office or the defense. JOSH HAWLEY: I don't have the probation office  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No  --  excuse me, Senator. The probation office provides a recommendation. There has been information gathered about what a recommendation was given in each one of these cases. I don't have that information here, but what I'm saying is that in every case, the judge is not just hearing from the government. The  --  the judge is not just evaluating what the government says in these cases. In every criminal case, a judge has to take into account all sorts of factors, including arguments being made by the defendant, by the government, by the probation office. So I understand that in certain cases the government may have made an argument, but there are other people in our criminal justice system who make arguments and the court evaluates everything as Congress has directed. And no one case can stand in for my entire record of how I deal with criminal cases or did when I was a district judge. I have law enforcement in my family. I am a mother who has daughters who took these cases home with me at night because they are so graphic in terms of the kinds of images that you are describing. They give you not only the actual videos which you can ask to see, but they describe in the briefs in detail what these videos show. So I am fully aware of the seriousness of this offense and also my obligation to take into account all of the various aspects of the crime as Congress has required me to do and I made a determination seriously in each case. [*]JOSH HAWLEY: What I'm trying to understand is why is it that you say multiple times that just because there are prepubescent victims in Cooper, in Hawkins that that does not signal that this is a heinous or egregious child pornography offense and you're not going to apply any sentencing enhancement. So the government's asking you for the sentence gives [Ph] to be less because you say I'm not going to apply  --  the government asked for enhancements related to prepubescent children, related to the  -- the nature of these images. You say I'm not going to apply it. But I gue -- what you're telling me is I guess that you -- you don't have a policy objection. I mean, why -- why didn't you apply the enhancements as they were asked for? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question many times from many Senators who've asked me, so I'll stand on what I've already said. JOSH HAWLEY: So you have nothing to add about  --  about why these crimes, why these images in your view do not signal an especially heinous or egregious child pornography offense. That's Hawkins. You say in Cooper I understand the government's argument, but I don't find them persuasive  --  the fact that there were prepubescent children  --  from the standpoint of characterizing this as an especially egregious child pornography offense. That's page 58. Let me ask you this. You said Senator Graham  --  to Senator Graham earlier today that you were trying to do what's rational and you didn't  --  in sentencing in these cases. And you didn't think it was rational to sentence people who have thousands of images by using a computer to the sentencing guidelines to the man  --  to the mandatory range. Or I'm sorry, it's not mandatory. To the no longer mandatory range, the discretionary range. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. I said the guidelines system is designed to be rational. JOSH HAWLEY: Okay. So let me ask you this. Why isn't it rational to sentence people who have thousands of images on a computer to more time as opposed to somebody who has one or two pictures in the mail? In other words, the more images there are, why wouldn't you want to sentence that person to more time rather than less? Why isn't that rational? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question and I'll stand on what I already answered. JOSH HAWLEY: So  --  but your answer is what? I mean, refresh my memory. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I've answered this question. I've explained how the guidelines work and I'll stand on my answer. JOSH HAWLEY: But the guidelines are not mandatory. I wish they were, but they're not. The Supreme Court made that determination. I'm trying to understand why you think it's rational not to sentence criminals based on the number of images they have. You say that this is a policy disagreement that you have with the guidelines. This gets to the core of your judicial philosophy. You served on the Sentencing Commission where you recommended changes to the guidelines based in part on this policy disagreement. So I think it's relevant and indeed vital we understand what the policy disagreement is. That's what I'm trying to get at. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I previously explained what the policy disagreement is and I will stand on my answer. JOSH HAWLEY: So you're not going to answer my question. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, I've answered your question in my answer. I've explained  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  You haven't answered my question. I'm sitting here asking you and you're declining to answer. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I've explained how the guidelines work. I've explained that the guidelines were developed at a time in which the commission of this crime was different than it is today. I've explained that Congress has not intervened to revise or direct the commission around how to deal with the changes in the commission of this crime. And so judges all over the country are grappling with how to apply this guideline under these circumstances. And there's ex  --  an extreme amount of disparity. And in each case, a judge has to look at all of the factors, not just the guidelines, not just what the government asks for, but the recommendations of the probation office, the arguments of the government and the defense, the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant. The need for the sentence imposed to promote the purposes of punishment which include things like rehabilitation. Also in every case Congress has authorized judges to impose not only terms of imprisonment, which are a very important part of the consequences for these crimes, but a range of other preventative kinds of measures which courts impose in cases to prevent these defendants from repeating these egregious  --  this type of egregious conduct. And I talked to each defendant as you have quoted, explaining to them the harms that their crimes caused. And I imposed not only a term of imprisonment but also all of the other consequences of the offense to include decades of supervision, restrictions on use of a computer, and the like. That's my answer. I've answered it many times. Do you have other questions for me [Inaudible]  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  Yeah, I do. I do. Cause I  --  I want to  --  I want to try to understand when you talk about the guidelines being outdated and outmoded, I understand that they were written  --  the initial guidelines were written at a time when computers were not common. Everybody didn't have one. Certainly didn't have phones in every pocket like we do now, smartphones. So I understand that. I also understand that the number of images  --  sexually exploitative images of children on these devices has exploded. And so I'm trying to get at what Senator Coons earlier characterize as a pretty fundamental policy question, which I think is the correct characterization here. I'm trying to understand your view on why it is that while the images  --  the number of images available on these things has exploded, that sentencing shouldn't track that. See what I'm saying? I mean, you've made the argument, if I understand you right, and I want you to correct me if I'm wrong. You've made the argument that, well, look, the guidelines were written at a time when this stuff was, like, it was  --  it was an individual picture. It was, you know, magazines, whatever. Now almost every offender I  --  I think  --  this is the argument, so you correct me. Almost every offender because of the nature of this, they've got tens, hundreds, sometimes thousands. I mean be  --  partly cause the nature of this. My question to you is wouldn't we want to deter that? Isn't that a reason to impose tougher sentences? I mean  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator  -- JOSH HAWLEY: --  Go ahead. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The  --  the Congress has every ability to do that. What's happening now is that you have a guideline that has gradations in it for the number of images that ends up being when you look at the scale something like the difference of 10 years. I'm making  --  I  --  I don't know exactly what it is, but each  --  each two level enhancement is like several years and the gradations are like zero to  --  and again, I don't have it in front of me, but it's like zero to 50 pictures, 50 to 100 pictures, 100 to 150 pictures set up at a time in which the mail was the primary mode of possession and distribution. And so if somebody had 50 pictures, they according to Congress and the commission at the time deserved an extra 10 years in prison. Now, with that scale, everybody's at the top immediately just because of the nature of the internet. So you're not differentiating using that scale anymore, given the way this crime is committed. And so judges are having to decide how are we going to deal with the penalties and do our jobs to impose sentences that are sufficient but not greater than necessary under these circumstances. JOSH HAWLEY: Yep. Thank you, Judge. I'll just  --  I'll just say in closing that I  --  I appreciate that answer. And I understand that as a policy matter. I just think we disagree. I think that somebody  --  the more images are there, the more punishment there should be. And I want to see this deterred. And I just think we've pretty fundamentally disagreed. I've enjoyed our exchanges. Thank you for your candor and I appreciate it. I  --  I just disagree with you on the law. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. PATRICK LEAHY: Senator Hirono. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman? PATRICK LEAHY: Senator Hirono's turn. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman  -- TED CRUZ: --  Mr. Chairman, I'm a  --  I'm asking to be recognized to ma  --  make a point to the Chairman. PATRICK LEAHY: No. Mr. Chairman  -- MAZIE K. HIRONO: --  I believe he recognized me. May I proceed  -- TED CRUZ: --  Mi  --  Mi  --  Mr. Chairman  -- PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I waited my turn on here and I've been on this committee for 47 years. I  --  I think we ought to follow the regular order. TED CRUZ: Mis  --  Mr. Chairman, the witness just said that we cannot understand those cases without the pre-sentence  -- DICK DURBIN: --  I'm sorry, Senator  -- TED CRUZ: --  Reports  -- DICK DURBIN: --  I don't want to go through this again  -- TED CRUZ: --  I have a letter that I want to enter into the record  -- DICK DURBIN: --  There are rules in the committee that should be followed  -- TED CRUZ: --  That's signed by 10 Senators on this committee. Are  --  do you  --  are you not even going to allow a letter from 10 Senators on this committee? DICK DURBIN: --  You want to  --  an  --  any letter. You can do it by hand  -- TED CRUZ: --  Thi  --  this letter that is signed by 10 Senators on the committee addressed to you makes the point that the White House gave you probation information for Democrats that was not provided to the minority on this committee. And just now Judge Jackson told Senator Hawley you cannot understand these cases without reading the probation reports. 10 Senators on this committee are asking the chairman  -- PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman  -- TED CRUZ: --  To provide those reports so we can do what Judge Jackson just said  -- PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I know the  -- TED CRUZ: --  Which is to assess those reports. And here is the letter. I ask unanimous  -- PATRICK LEAHY: --  Mr. Chairman, I  --  I know the ju  -- TED CRUZ: --  Consent to be admitted to the record  -- PATRICK LEADY: --  I know the junior Senator  --  I know the junior Senator from Texas likes to get on television. But most of us have been here a long time trying to follow the rules. And he could very easily hand you a letter to go in  --  in the record. He's saying he's doing this to help Senator Hawley. Senator Hawley could have put it in. He didn't. Let  --  let's get back to regular  -- TED CRUZ: --  Sen  --  Senator Hawley didn't write the letter. Mr. Chairman  -- PATRICK LEAHY: --  Let's get back to regular order  -- TED CRUZ: --  I ask unanimous consent that it be admitted to the record. DICK DURBIN: Senator Hirono. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you  -- TED CRUZ: --  Are  --  are  --  are you denying consent? MAZIE K. HIRONO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Aloha, Judge, Jackson. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Aloha. *** Text Missing *** [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think consensus is very important. It was one of the things that I most admired about having the opportunity to work for Justice Breyer as a law clerk, to observe  his process for reaching out to colleagues and trying to collaborate in his thought process about the outcomes of cases. And it's something that I tried to emulate when I was on the Sentencing Commission, which, as you said, is a very diverse body. And I saw, in that context, the importance of trying to reach common ground with respect to your determinations. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Mr. Chairman -- thank you very much -- to illustrate the kind of broad support that this nominee has, I would like to enter into the record two letters, one signed by a thousand public defenders from all across the country and another from  --  signed by 48 prosecutors from across the country. Judge Jackson, I have very much enjoyed the  -- DICK DURBIN: Without objections. MAZIE K. HIRONO: Of talking with you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And it will be my privilege to support your nomination. Aloha. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. DICK DURBIN: Thank you very much, Senator. CHUCK GRASSLEY: Mr. Chairman? DICK DURBIN: The Senator from Iowa? CHUCK GRASSLEY: Yeah. I have a letter here signed by members on my side of the aisle I'd like to put in the record. DICK DURBIN: Without objection.I'd like to comment. I had a chance to review this letter for the first time just a minute ago. There is a  --  apparently a concern on your side, Mr. Chairman, about whether you have on your side of the aisle access to all the information that we have on this side of the aisle and all the information that's in the possession of the White House. During a break earlier today, I met with the ranking member, Senator Grassley, his staff and with White House staff to discuss it. Here's my understanding of what has transpired. Last Wednesday evening, the senator from Missouri selected a handful of Judge Jackson's more than 1,000 district court cases to claim that Judge Jackson "endangers our children."On Thursday, the next day, the White House contacted Judge Jackson's chambers to request the probation office recommendation in each of the cases. I  --  I underline probation office. That probation office provided a chart reflecting these recommendations. This is the sum total of what was provided. They shared with the White House from the chambers, when the senator from Missouri continued to raise questions and request the probation officers recommendation in these cases, the probation office provided this chart reflecting those recommendations, which was shared with the White House. When the senator from Missouri continued to raise questions about Judge Jackson's sentencing record, my staff asked the White House for information about the probation office recommendations. These are just numbers for each one of the cases. That's all that is. The White House and my office didn't have this information earlier because we didn't know the senator from Missouri was going to make this claim in the first place. Once the Republican side requested the same information, my staff shared it within minutes. So, now your side, Senator, has exactly what the White House and the Democratic side has, the same chart provided by the probation office. And I might add that some of this had been published in the press, in Washington Post and other places, but it consists, in each case, of the case number, name, the probation office recommendation for custody, the sentence imposed, custody, the probation office recommended supervision and release, and the supervision and release imposed. All of that information has now been shared equally. Some information on the other side, on the Republican side, includes frequent reference to transcripts, which we don't have on this side. And the reason being we didn't anticipate this objection from the senator from Missouri and request that information. Now, the letter also goes a step beyond, which I think is a very important decision for this committee to make, this request for pre-sentence reports from each of these cases. Now, these pre-sentence report reports are tip  --  typically filed under seal. They can contain highly sensitive personal information, not just about the defendant but about innocent third parties and victims. We've spent a lot of time here reflecting on these terrible crimes. Everyone has acknowledged how terrible they are and how damaging they can be to the victims. We have heard story after story, and I don't question a single word that was spoken in sympathy for these same victims.I would not want it weighing on my conscience that we are turning over these pre-sentence reports to this committee for the first time in history and that information out of this or because it was released would somehow compromise or endanger any victim as a result of it. This information was not requested before. It's never been requested by this committee.And I think we ought to think long and hard about whether or not we even consider going into pre-sentence reports. So, I'm going to take this matter up with our side and I'm sure you will with your side. I have your letter requesting it. As far as this information, you have exactly what we have, no more, no less. In terms of pre-sentence reports, this is a critical policy question which ought to be carefully weighed. It goes way beyond  --  I'm sorry, Senator  --  Judge Jackson, it goes way beyond your nomination, and I want to make certain that we don't take a step here that endangers the lives or well-being of innocent people. TED CRUZ: Mr. Chairman, since you just responded to the letter that I wrote and was submitted on behalf of  --  of ten Senators, I will point out that in Judge Jack's  --  Jackson's answer to Senator Hawley, she said that he and this committee did not have sufficient information to assess her sentencing decisions because we heard the arguments of the prosecutors in the transcript, but we did not have the recommendation from the probation office.And what she testified under oath is you can't understand what  --  why she issued her sentences without having those probation reports. You are right that there can be sensitive victim information in those reports, and  --  and everyone on this side, I'm confident, would agree to redacting out any information that  --  that would violate the privacy of a victim.But Judge Jackson has told us it is relevant to understanding those cases, and  --  and that's why ten of us have requested. We have those reports and there's explicit statutory authority for us to do so that is cited in the letter we just submitted. DICK DURBIN: Senator, I don't know where other members of your caucus stand on the basic question of this nomination. They can decide on their own, and they will and they should. That is their responsibility. I think I know where you're headed. And I would just suggest that we ought to think long and hard, my friends, about members of the Judiciary Committee endangering the lives of innocent people to pursue this line of questioning.We spent two days, 15, 16, 17, 18 hours, and a large part of it on this issue. I don't believe these pre-sentencing reports are going to change anyone's disposition if they're going to vote on this issue. And I  --  I do not want it weighing on my conscience that I gave the green light to release this information so that it might endanger the lives of innocent victims.I'm sorry. That's a bridge too far for me. I think the issue before us on sentencing, you've each had a chance to hear plenty of testimony on it. And I  --  I believe this should be taken up with the individual caucuses on both sides, if you wish. But that, to me, is  --  it's gone way too far, way too far. I don't want it on my conscience. PATRICK LEAHY: Mr.  --  Mr. Chairman, if I might  -- DICK DURBIN: Senator Leahy? PATRICK LEAHY: One  --  one, I agree with you. I prosecuted literally thousands of people. I  --  We'd have to go back and see. Over eight years, I can't  --  I can't remember the hundreds of sentencings I was at we had pre-sentence reports. Over and over again, there were things in there that were sensitive.Sometimes we were affecting somebody who were putting their lives on the line to even give a report. Neither the defense counsel nor I as a prosecutor ever thought those would be made public, and we assumed that the judges  --  we had judges across the political stripes who read them, kept the confidence of that. And as a result, we knew that the reports were  --  were thorough. And a judge has the final say. But as a prosecutor, I might have a recommendation, but I never questioned a judge who might give a different sentence because my  --  my responsibility is prosecute. Theirs was the sentence. DICK DURBIN: Senator Lee? MIKE LEE: Yep. Might I just weight in here? I  --  I totally understand the concern that you're describing relative to the confidential nature of pre-sentence reports. As a prosecutor and as a law clerk, I reviewed those with some regularity, and I understand the sensitivity of them. Let me suggest a couple things.  [*]MAZIE K. HIRONO: I'm going to try and spread some aloha into this room. [Laughter] I'm taking a lead from my friend, Senator sitting to my left. Well, at least you and I are very color coordinated today. So since  '18. I have been asking every nominee that comes before the committee's on which I said the two questions that I asked you at the start of my time, namely whether or not they have a history of sexual assault or harassment. This is something I started in 2018 to make sure that harassment and abuse that women, mainly, have put up with since as far as I'm concerned, time immemorial, didn't continue to get swept under the rug. I found these questions to be important for nominees to the judiciary. As Chief Justice Roberts stated in his 2017 yearend report on the federal judiciary, events in recent months have illuminated the depth of the problem of sexual harassment in the workplace and events in the past few weeks have made clear that the judicial branch is not immune. Here are just a few examples of abusive practices by federal judges. In December 2017, six former law clerks and staffers accused Ninth Circuit Judge, Alex Kozinski, of subjecting them to a range of inappropriate sexual conduct and comments. In September 2019, the 10th Circuit Judicial Council issued an order finding that District Court Judge Carlos McGreb [Ph] -- apologize if I mispronounced his last name  --  had harassed multiple employees over a period of years, including by subjecting them to sexually suggestive comments, inappropriate text messages, and excessive non-work related conduct. In February 2020, former law clerk to the late Ninth Circuit Judge, Stephen Reinhart, accused the judge of a month's long harassment campaign. And these are a few of the cases that we know about. There are undoubtedly many more we don't know about both because of the power imbalance between federal judges and their clerks and employees who often rely on connections and recommendations to advance in their careers and because of the lack of legal recourse available to the judicial employees. Many may not realize this, but federal judicial branch employees are not protected by the foundational federal statutes such as title seven of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that prohibit discrimination and retaliation. And that's why I introduced, along with Chair Durbin and Senators Whitehouse and Murray, the Judicial Accountability Act, which would ensure the more than 30,000 employees of the federal judiciary have strong statutory rights and protections against discrimination, sexual harassment, retaliation, and other forms of workplace conduct. I know you can't comment on legislation, so I won't ask you whether you support the Judicial Accountability Act. Instead, I'd like to hear what you do to make sure your chambers is a safe, inclusive place to work. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I, as you know, have been a judge now for almost a decade. And I take my responsibilities, not only to hear and decide cases seriously, but also my responsibility as an employer, that I bring law clerks into my chambers. I was a law clerk to three wonderful federal judges who were role models for me and I try to act as a role model to my law clerks. I tried to bring in people who  --  who have the respect of others, people who come with strong recommendations, people who I think will get along with one another. And certainly people who I think will get along with me. And we create a little group, a working group, and I think that it's  --  it's worked out well. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And I would think that you would make sure that there are no instances of inappropriate behavior or sexual harassment from any of your clerks or employees. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: That's absolutely correct. MAZIE K. HIRONO: During our courtesy meeting, I enjoyed learning more about your background and family. And of the nine sitting justices of the Supreme Court, only three, Justices Alito, Breyer, and Kagan, were educated in our public school system. And you would, as far as I'm concerned, make a welcome addition to the court from that standpoint as a public school graduate myself. So public high schools educate people from all backgrounds and most people go to public schools. Most people don't go  --  get to go to private schools. So your classmates probably came from different racial and ethnic backgrounds, income, social statuses, academic abilities, athletic ability  --  abilities among others. How, if at all, has your public school experience shaped the person you are and your approach to the law? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. I was very fortunate to go to public school in Miami, Florida. I had a wide range of classmates and it was a wonderful opportunity to get to know people who were different than me and to learn at the end of the day that they were not so different then  --  than I am, even if they came from different backgrounds. And, I've talked a lot about my debate team that was one of the activities that I engaged in and spent a lot of time with my colleagues on the debate team and with  --  with my wonderful coach. And you learn how to support each other, how to speak across difference, how to  --  how to communicate with different kinds of people. And it was  --  it was a wonderful experience. And  --  and as I've mentioned in many ways, different than the generation before who in Florida were segregated by law. MAZIE K. HIRONO: So I take it that not only did you have, I would say of a broad experience of encountering people from all different walks of life and backgrounds, but there was still a commonality that you had. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Very much so. MAZIE K. HIRONO: And that is very much exemplified in your approach to your work. I also talked with you about the importance of the creative part of our lives because I think lawyers tend to be a very left brain. And I know that you are a very well rounded person. And so I asked you, what do you do to pay attention to the creative side of your  --  of your life? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for the question. I took up, not too long ago, but took up the fiber arts as they say. My mother is an expert crochet artist. She makes beautiful pieces of all kinds, and I always wanted to do that. I always wanted  --  did  --  and she tried to teach me when I was younger and it didn't quite turn out. But as I have gone along in my career in wanting to have some sort of a creative outlet and especially in times of  --  of high stress, I started pining for something to do to express my creative side. And I bought a book on crochet. I talked to my mom. I started making hats and scarves, and then I moved to knitting during one of my confirmation hearing scenarios because I needed something to keep my mind off of  --  keep my mind off of the stress. So I  --  I have a basement full of yarn if you would like to come over. [Laughter] MAZIE K. HIRONO: I think that's another way that you're connecting to the people who really meant  --  mean a lot to you. The creative outlet is really important to me because in a changing world, I think it is our ability to be creative in our approaches, and how we think about things that will enable us to deal with the rapid changes that happen every day in these days. I view you as a consensus builder and so I know that in your work with the Sentencing Commission, you really worked hard to come up with some 95% of the time, they in this very diverse group, there was consensus in your recommendations. How important do you think a consensus is on  --  what I characterized yesterday as a very ideologically spit  --  split Supreme Court? [*]MIKE LEE: First of all, it's not unusual for us as a committee and as members of the United States Senate to review materials that would be inappropriate for public release. I don't think one of us is suggesting that. There are means by which we can review things in a classified environment and treat them as classified. We've done that with -- with -- with significant success in this hearing. Secondly, to the extent that wouldn't provide the level of comfort necessary. We'd also be happy to review them on a redacted basis. These are things that have become relevant in our conversations. We want to make sure that we  --  we have the facts. But not one of us wants to endanger anyone or to  --  to render public information that is sensitive in nature. There  --  there are abundant ways around that. DICK DURBIN: I would suggest that the information contained in these reports is dangerous. Dangerous to the victims and to the innocent people who are mentioned in these reports and unnecessary at this point. It's never been requested by this committee and it's merely a fishing ex  --  expedition in dangerous territory. Classified settings, redacted versions of the reports, this has never happened in the history of this committee. And I would say, Senator  --  Senator, I  --  I will just tell you, I am not going to be party to turning over this information and endangering the life of an innocent person for a political quest to find more information. We have exhausted this topic and we've gone through it over and over again. And I think that this is a bridge too far for this committee. That's my personal feeling. I take it that Senator Leahy may agree with me in that regard. This nominee has been before this committee for 18 hours. I don't believe that this information is going to change anyone's vote. You can decide in your caucus what you want to do to go forward. I've told you my position. I want to proceed if I can. I thank the Senator  --  the nominee for waiting for this colloquy and I turn it over to Senator Cotton. TOM COTTON: Judge, I want to return to the question of crime and specifically sentencing. In any of the cases where you've sentenced an offender below the guidelines has that offender gone on to commit another crime after getting released from prison? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. When judges sentence they often impose terms of supervised release. And there are times in which  --  when a person is on supervised release they re-offend. There are also times when  --  when they don't. But even after the peri  --  after the period of supervised release, the court doesn't continue to have any way of tracking or knowing what happens. Because if they were to re-offend it wouldn't necessarily come back to the same court or the same judge. TOM COTTON: So you  --  you don't have a factual basis to know whether or not anyone you've sentenced below the guidelines has re-offended in the future. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I ha  --  do I have a factual basis? I know that there are people who have re-offended while on supervised release. I can't remember whether any of them were guideline sentences, below guidelines, or above guideline sentences. TOM COTTON: Okay. I  --  I know you've answered a lot of questions the last two days about sentences in sex crimes. I  --  I just want to be exact about this. In these cases, have you ever sentenced an offender above the guidelines' recommendation? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I'd have to take a look at  --  I know that I have sentenced offenders to the guidelines if  --  in the category of sex crimes in general. I know that I've given 30 year sentences for at least one offender, almost 30 years, 29.5. I've given I believe a 12 year sentence for someone at the agreement of all of the parties which was a sentence that was a part of his plea agreement. I'm not remembering the others. TOM COTTON: I understand. You've sentenced in a lot of cases. I  --  I want to return briefly to the Hawkins case. Wesley Hawkins, as a reminder, was convicted of child  --  a child pornography offense in 2013. The sentencing guidelines for this offense called for a sentence of 97 to 121 months or eight to 10 years. The prosecutors asked for 24 months. You sentenced him to three months. We've heard a lot about this case and your three month sentence of Wesley Hawkins. But you got another crack at him in 2019, Judge. In 2019, you sent Wesley Hawkins back under conditions of confinement with the Bureau of Prisons for six months with additional restrictions on his computer usage. That's twice the amount of time in custody that you sentenced him to in 2013. What did Wesley Hawkins do in 2019, Judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Oh I don't remember, Senator. I have a lot of defendants who I've sentenced who are on supervision who violate conditions of supervision. If in our system, someone like Mr. Hawkins, especially given the crime  --  the egregious crime that he committed was likely on a very long period of supervision. And during that time he would likely be under computer restrictions for 10, 20 years or something where he's not allowed to do certain things with a computer and a probation officer is monitoring  --  they put software on the computers of individuals who are  --  who have these kinds of conditions imposed and that restricts their ability to access certain information on the internet. And so it's not uncommon for a probation officer to report violations of supervised release not just in this area but across all crimes. And then the court has to determine how to handle that. And you could in fact send someone back to jail for violating conditions of supervised release that are not themselves criminal behavior. It's just, you know, the court says in their supervision order I'm imposing a 20 year or whatever it is sentence of supervision and during this time you're not allowed to access your computer, et cetera, et cetera. So if he were to do that it wouldn't be additional criminal behavior, but it would be a violation of my order. And when he comes back to the court on violation, the court has factors that we look at to determine whether or not to treat that essentially as the kind of violation that would require him to go back to jail. TOM COTTON: Okay. Judge, yesterday we had an extended conversation of your sentencing of a man named Keith Hodges, a fentanyl kingpin. That sentencing occurred in 2018. You had very detailed recall of that sentence. To my knowledge, that's the only time anyone's asked you about Mr. Hodges' sentence. You've been asked repeatedly over the last two days about the Hawkins case. It's been in the news as Senator Durbin has cited for days on end. This sentencing happened in  --  resentencing happened in 2019. A  --  and now you're saying you don't have any recollection of it. Let me see if I can refresh your recollection. This is the order you signed, Judge, on April 17th, 2019 in USA v Hawkins. And it says that you concur with the recommendation of the probation office to return him to a residential reentry ci  --  facility for 180 days and to engage in various kinds of commu  --  computer monitoring and computer to computer monitoring and search. There's your signature over there, Judge. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. TOM COTTON: You really don't  --  you really don't remember what  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Senator that is a very, very common thing that judges do. I've sentenced over 100 people and supervised release, which is the kind of post incarceration condition that judges ordinarily impose, is something that's done on a standard form which is what that is  -- TOM COTTON: --  I  --  I understand you've done a lot, Judge. But no  --  none of them have been the centerpiece of your hearing for the last two days. Do you really  --  do you really expect this committee to believe that you don't remember what happened in this Hawkins case when it came back before you? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator, I  --  I do expect you to believe. That's my testimony  -- TOM COTTON: --  Well, I don't find it credible, Judge. It's been in the news for days. Senator Durbin has cited it being in the news for days. You've been asked about it probably more than any other case you've ever had. And I just don't find it credible that you weren't prepared for that matter in two  --  2019. You know what I think? I think he got caught with child pornography again and he wouldn't have if he had been in prison for the eight to 10 years the guidelines called for in 2013 when you first sentenced him. Let's turn though to your work for detainees at Guantanamo Bay. First off, let me just ask do you think most detainees at Guantanamo Bay were  --  were mostly terrorists or mostly, I don't know, innocent goat farmers? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, it's impossible for me to answer that question. The people at Guantanamo Bay have been accused by the government of engaging in terrorist activities and therefore classified by the executive branch as enemy combatants. TOM COTTON: Okay. Do you think it would  --  America would be safer or less safe if we released all the detainees at Guantanamo Bay?[*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm -- I'm trying to figure out how to answer that question. 911 was a terrible attack on our country and the Executive Branch pursuant to authority that the Supreme Court said it had, designated people as enemy combatants and sent them to Guantanamo Bay. The Supreme Court also said that anybody who was so detained could seek review of their detention. And as a federal public defender, my role and responsibility was to make arguments in defense of the Constitution and in service to the court that was trying to assess, based on the authority given to it by the Supreme Court, whether or not people were adequately classified, what the legal circumstances were, how these habeas petitions were going to be processed? This was a series of -- a series of legal challenges in a novel environment that federal public defenders and lawyers across the country were engaged in helping the court to evaluate so that we can understand what the Constitution required in this time of emergency. TOM COTTON: Okay. So  --  so no opinion on whether America would be safer or less safe if we released all the detainees from Guantanamo Bay? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, America would be less [Ph] safe if we don't have terrorists out running around attacking this country. Absolutely. America would also be more safe in a situation in which all of our constitutional rights are protected. This is the way our scheme works. This is how the Constitution that we all love operates. It's about making sure that the government is doing what it's supposed to do in a time of crisis. As Justice Gorsuch said, the Constitution is not suspended in times of crisis. The government still has to follow the rules. And so criminal defense lawyers make sure that in times of crisis the government is following the rules. TOM COTTON: Okay. Let's turn to the actual cases. How many of these terrorists at Guantanamo Bay did you represent? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: When I was a defender, four cases were assigned to me in our office, I don't know how many cases came into the office in total, but  -- TOM COTTON: But, you personally had four. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I was assigned to them along with another defender who worked on the same cases. She was more senior, she did a lot of  --  she did all of the sort of fact gathering related to the cases. And as an appellate defender, I worked on the legal arguments. TOM COTTON: Did you ever represent any of the detainees at Guantanamo Bay when you were not a public defender? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: One of the people who I'd represented while I was in  --  a federal defender, his case got spun off and taken up by a law firm. Law firms around the country were also engaged in this work. TOM COTTON: I'm well aware of the [Ph] firms were doing at the time. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. And I left the Federal Public Defender's Office. I joined a law firm and the  --  one of the people that I had represented was now at that law firm. They had him as a client. TOM COTTON: That's Mr. Asalom [Ph]? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: al-Qahtani [Ph]. TOM COTTON: al-Qahtani [Ph] was the one. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Was the one who  -- TOM COTTON: Coincidentally, both he and you went to Morrison & Forester? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. TOM COTTON: Okay. What about Mr. Asalom [Ph]? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't know what happened to Mr. Asalom [Ph]? TOM COTTON: You were listed as counsel for two years during your time at Morrison & Forester. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: What happens is when you leave  --  when you leave from any place, firms or government service, you have to let the court know or their records  --  their records reflect where you are in the system and not so much the case in terms of your address  -- TOM COTTON: So to go back to Mr. al-Qahtani  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. TOM COTTON: So he just coincidentally, it's a small world, went to Morrison & Forster at the same time you did and then you represented him and you did file multiple motions on his behalf? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, I don't know if it was at the same time, I'm not sure  -- TOM COTTON: But you did file multiple motions for him  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I only  -- TOM COTTON: --  in 2008 and 2009. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I don't recall whether it was multiple, but he was still at the habeas stage of the process. And I don't know when he came because the partners who picked up the case were in Los Angeles. I was in Washington DC. They contacted me to say, oh, we see on the docket that you had previously represented him and now you're with our firm, will you assist us with looking at these briefs, working on these briefs? There were many lawyers who were working on the filings that you're talking about. TOM COTTON: After you left the public defender's office, did  --  did you continue in your representation of any other client you had had at the public defender's office? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I didn't continue my representation of any client. I left the Federal Public Defender's Office and then picked up Mr. al-Qahtani [Ph] through the circumstances that I talked about. And there were no other clients that I represented in that way. TOM COTTON: I have to say that sounds like continuation. You represented him at the public defender's office and then you represented him in private practice as well. And you're telling us that's the only person you represented at both the public defender's office and in private practice? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. TOM COTTON: So you didn't continue to provide any kind of pro-bono work for murderers or rapists or anyone else? But you did continue to represent this terrorist at Guantanamo Bay? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: When I got to the firm and they told me that the case was there and they recognized that I was at the firm and had previously worked on the case  --  and by they, I mean the partners in the firm. They asked me as a member of the Supreme Court and appellate group of the firm, which is where  --  what was my practice. If I would help review and work on some of the briefing that they were submitting on his behalf given my familiarity with the case. TOM COTTON: Were you representing him pro bono at Morrison & Forester? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The firm represents  --  the firm takes on pro bono representations, which means that the person isn't paying. And  -- TOM COTTON: And let's turn to your amicus briefs. You had two briefs in Guantanamo cases, one for a think tank, one on behalf of a group of former judges. I think as anyone who's done amicus works  --  work knows sometimes the clients seek out the lawyers, sometimes the lawyers seek out the client. For either of those amicus briefs, were you involved in any way in seeking or recruiting those clients or suggesting the idea for an amicus brief in the first place? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: No, Senator. TOM COTTON: Were both of those briefs done on a pro-bono basis? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, because the Supreme Court, an appellate group in a law firm has paid clients and also has pro bono clients. And the briefs that I worked on were on the  --  one brief was 20 former federal judges who wanted to make an argument in the Boumediene case that was in the Supreme Court. And one of them was a partner at my law firm. She was a former federal judge whose idea it was and she knew the other judges and wanted our group to work on the brief. The other, was not just one think tank, it was the Cato Institute, the Rutherford Institute, and the Constitution Project, an ideologically diverse group of non-profits who wanted to make arguments in another case that the Supreme Court had taken up related to these issues because all of this was novel and a lot of issues were being evaluated by the Supreme Court regarding the scope of executive authority during this time of crisis. TOM COTTON: Okay. So you've done pro-bono work for  --  on behalf of detainees at Guantanamo Bay. Have you ever done pro-bono work for the victims of terrorism? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, I'm not aware of any such cases in  --  in my law firm. I was in a group of lawyers that was often approached to ask, would you file a brief for some group? And I'm not aware that any victims of terrorism asked our firm to participate. TOM COTTON: Okay. So we've talked a lot about the people you represent. Let's talk a little bit about the defendants in those cases and how you characterize them. I'll remind you that those were the President, the Secretary of Defense, and active duty Army officer. Senator Graham and Senator Cornyn said that you called them war criminals.[*]TOM COTTON: You disputed that. And Senator Durbin has repeatedly denied it as well. And I'll concede you didn't use those exact words. You didn't say war criminals, but you did say in multiple court filings that they committed acts that constitute war crimes. I'm sorry, but I gotta confess I don't understand the difference between saying someone is a war criminal and saying they've committed acts that constitute war crimes. So, can you explain that difference to me? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I will. Thank you for the opportunity. So, when you file a habeas petition under our law, you can't file it against the United States because of -- of sovereign immunity. The way our law works, you have to file it against individual officers in their official capacity. That's the way in which you're able to file a habeas petition. So, whoever is the executive at the time becomes the named party in the brief. And a habeas petition is like a complaint in a --  in a civil case. It's making allegations to begin the litigation about the person's detention. You  --  you  -- TOM COTTON: But  --  but, Judge, official capacity, personal capacity, all that is just a bunch of procedural gobbledygook. These are the people that you said committed acts that constitute war crimes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senators  -- TOM COTTON: I just don't understand the difference between calling someone a war criminal and saying they committed acts that constitute war crimes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: With respect, Senator, they were not sued in their individual capacity. We weren't making allegations about those individuals. And in fact, over the course of the case, the names changed. So, later on the habeas petition became against President Obama because he then became the executive for the purpose of the habeas petition. TOM COTTON: I'm well aware of the name change. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So, it wasn't  -- TOM COTTON: It probably changed from Bob Gates  --  or from Don Rumsfeld to Bob Gates as well, but they were not the ones in office. They were not the ones who were overseeing the government when you filed the suits and you said they committed acts that constitute war crimes. I just don't  --  I don't understand how you expect this committee to believe that there's a difference between saying someone is a war criminal and saying they committed war crimes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you for the opportunity to explain, Senator. One of the allegations that had been publicly reported with respect to the group of people who were in Guantanamo Bay was an allegation concerning the use of torture. And when you make that allegation, you bring it under laws that themselves constitute crimes of war. That's the way in which the law works. So, if you  --  if you were in a  --  if you're writing a habeas petition and you say, upon information and belief, Mr. al-Qahtani was tortured, that allegation is made under a law that says that there was a war crime that occurred as a result of that torture, and anyone  --  and you're making that allegation against the United States. But because you can't sue the United States, the actual petition is named in the name of whoever's leading the United States at the time.So, later in this  --  the course of this, it moved from President Bush, Donald Rumsfeld to President Obama. It didn't  --  it's not about the individual. It's about the allegation that  --  that Mr. al-Qahtani, upon information and belief, had been tortured in the lead up to his detention. TOM COTTON: I don't know, Judge. Sounds like a debate about how many terrorists can dance on the head of a pin to me. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Cotton.I ask unanimous consent to enter a letter in the record from nine former national security officials defending Judge Jackson's Guantanamo representation. The signatories include former Attorney General Loretta Lynch, Department of Homeland Security Secretary, Jeh Johnson, and the former judge advocate general of the United States Navy.Senator Booker? CORY BOOKER: Thank you very much. Judge, after me only five to go, but sit back for a second because I don't have questions right away. I actually have a number of things I  --  I just want to say, because this has been not a surprise given the history that we all know, not a surprise but perhaps a little bit of a disappointment, some of the things that have been said in  --  in this hearing. The way you have dealt with some of these things, that's why you are a judge and I am a politician, because you have sat with grit and grace and have shown us just extraordinary demeanor during the times where people were saying things to you that are actually out of the norm. I had to go up dais to ask some of my more senior colleagues about the  --  what I feel like is a dangerous precedent. People are taking  --  a thousand cases you've been over, is that right? I'm sorry, I said you  --  wouldn't ask you questions, but just give me a  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Some  -- something like that. CORY BOOKER: Something like that. And from what I understand, is that these cases are  --  often takes  --  take days, weeks, sometimes months, right? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: To  -- CORY BOOKER: To  --  to KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Decide in a case? CORY BOOKER: Yeah. Yes. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. CORY BOOKER: There's a trial sometimes. And folks are taking any of those cases and just trying to pick pieces out. And so, my  --  my colleague, Senator Hawley, has been doing this all into the lead up, and saying things, tweeting things that I think that a lot of us  --  when I was just trying to get some advice here, is this is what the new standard is going to be, that any judge coming before us that has ever chosen outside of the sentencing guidelines, below the sentencing guidelines.We're creating this environment now where I could make myself the hero of people who have been victims of some horrible crime, and suddenly put whatever judge I want on the defensive by trying to drag out little bits when they have no context to the case, none of the facts. They're seeking to exploit the complexities of a criminal justice system, the reason why we have a third branch of government.I  --  I feel bad that there was a judge mentioned by name in this hearing that's from Senator Hawley's state. What is that judge going to think next time they  --  they have a complicated sexual abuse case that comes before them, and they know that they could possibly be called out if they go below the sentencing guidelines, which I showed you yesterday in my lack of chart. If you remember, I was uncharted, but that you are deciding completely in the norm. 70 plus percent, and many states, are  --  people are doing just like you did.But I'm a  --  I'm a Democratic senator. I  --  I  --  I've never quoted from this very well respected, conservative, periodical. This is the National Review, very well respected. They're not  --  not necessarily something I agree with all the time. But here's what the National Review  --  this is the title. Senator Hawley's Disingenuous Attack against Judge Jackson's Record on Child Pornography.I'll just read the first paragraph. I would oppose Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson because of her judicial philosophy for the reasons I outlined last week. I addressed that in a separate post. For now, I want to discuss the claim by Senator Josh Hawley that Judge Jackson is appallingly soft on child pornography offenders. This is the kicker here. The allegations appear meritless to the point of demagoguery. I  --  I  --  I got letters from leaders of victims rights groups, survivors of assault, all saying sort of the same thing with the National Review. Feel proud about yourself. You brought together right and left in this. In this  --  in this calling out of people that will sit up here and try to pull out from cases and try to put themselves in a position where they're the defenders of our children to a person who has children, to a person whose family goes out in streets and defends children. I mean, this is a new  --  new low. And what's especially surprising about this is it didn't happen last year. You were put on a court that I'm told is the  --  considered like the second most powerful court in our land and you were passed with bipartisan support. Nobody brought it up then. Did they not do their homework? Were they lax? Did they make a mistake? I wonder  --  as they ask you the question, do you regret, I wonder if they regret that, that they didn't bring that out. No. Why? Because it was an allegation that is meritless to the point of demagoguery.You are  --  I don't mean this in any way, because if anybody called me average I would  --  I would be upset, but you are a  --  a mainstream judge. Your sentencing, I've looked at the data, falls in the mainstream on everything from child sexual assault to all the other issues that people are trying to bring up. Some of these things are being cast that you, that you called George Bush a war criminal, come on. That is painful, especially because, as you said, the brief changed. These are names that you have to put in. And we're talking about a real issue that goes to the core of our values, torture. Barack Obama was named once he  --  once Bush left office. There is an absurdity to this that is  --  it  --  it is almost comical if it was not so dangerous. [*]CORY BOOKER: Because the next time a judge comes before us on the right or the left that has a body of work like you do, gosh, one of the awesome performance artists on our side could pull out one of the cases where they were below the sentencing guidelines, say, for example, it was on something like as horrific as rape that we all agree is horrific, and they can suddenly put themselves as to how dare we put someone who's soft on crime. Well, are you soft on crime? God bless America. I got this great text. I've become really good friends with the folks at the FOP for my negotiations, and this was my favorite text. You all got to get this. I think my brother Kennedy might get a kick out of this. He goes, things that are uncountable -- stars in the sky, grains of sand on the beach, and the number of times Democrats will mention that the FOP endorsed Judge Jackson in this hearing. But let me mention it again, just in case my people say you're rough on crime folks really want to try to make that stick. You were endorsed by the largest organization of rank and file police officers. You were endorsed by the bosses, the largest organization of chiefs of police, and you were endorsed by Noble who I hope people find out more about that organization. You got uncles that are officers. You got a brother, not just an officer, who went to serve after 911. Your family's not soft on terrorism. He went out there to capture and kill and defend this country from terrorists. I'm actually sitting back here and finding this astonishing, but then I do my homework. I love that my colleague brought up Constance Baker Motley. You know, when --  when she was getting to the floor of the Senate, they were trying to stop her with outrageous accusations. You know what the accusation was back then? She was a communist. Dragging up stories, trying to throw anything that they might stick, but this is what you and I know. Any one of us senators could yell as loud as we want that Venus can't return a serve. We could yell as loud as we want that Beyonce can't sing. We could yell as much as we want that Astronaut Mae Jamison didn't go all that high. But you know what, they got nothing to prove. As it says in the Bible, let the work I've done speak for me. Well, you have spoken. You started speaking as a little girl, watching that man right there, try to raise a family and study law while your momma supported everybody. You spoke in high school when you started distinguishing yourself, and you know what you said when they told you you couldn't go to Harvard? Watch me. I went to law school. I didn't serve on the law review; you did. I didn't clerk at every level of the federal court. You clerked for a Supreme Court justice, one widely respected on both sides, which really shaped you. You left there and you went to private practice, and you know what you found? This is what you told me, that you had those tough choices that working moms have to make, the demands of a private law firm, raising your kids. It just didn't add up. You went before this Senate three times in a bipartisan manner. God bless America. We don't do that much stuff bipartisan around here. You went and became a public defender because you wanted to understand all aspects of the law. Who does that? We live in a society that's very materialistic sometimes, very  --  very consumerist. You went into  --  do people become public defenders for the money? No. Your family and you speak to service, service, service. And I'm telling you right now, I'm not letting anybody in the Senate steal my joy. I told you this at the beginning. I  --  I have  --  I'm embarrassed. It happened earlier today. I just look at you and I start getting full of emotion. I'm jogging this morning, and I'm at the end of the block I live on. And I get  --  because I put my music on loud when I'm jogging, trying to block out the noise of the heart attack I'm having. And this woman comes up on me, practically tackles me, an African-American woman, and the look on her eyes. She just wanted to touch me because  --  I think because I'm sitting so close to you, and tell me what it meant to her to watch you sitting where you're sitting. And you did not get there because of some left-wing agenda. He didn't get here because of some dark money groups. You got here how every black woman in America who's gotten anywhere has done, by being like Ginger Rogers said; I did everything Fred Astaire did, but backwards in heels. And so I'm just sitting here saying nobody's stealing my joy. Nobody's going to make me angry, especially not people that are called in a conservative magazine demagogic for what they're bringing up that just doesn't hold water. I'm not going to let my job be stolen, because I know you and I, we appreciate something that we get that a lot of my colleagues don't. I know Tim Scott does. When I first came to this place, I was the fourth black person ever popularly elected to the United States Senate. And I still remember a lot of mixed people, white folks, black folks work here. But at night when people are in line to come in to clean this place, the percentage of minorities shift a lot. And so I'm walking here first week I'm here, and somebody who's been here for decades doing the urgent work of the Senate, but it's the unglamorous work that goes on, no matter who's in offices. The guy comes up to me. All he wants to say, I can tell, is I'm so happy you're here. But he comes up and he can't get the words out. And this man, my elder, starts crying, and I just hugged him and he just kept telling me it is so good to see you here. It's so good to see you here. Thank you, thank you, thank you. I love my brother Tim Scott. We could write a dissertation on our disagreements. He gave the best speech on race. I wish I could have given as good of a speech, but talking to the challenges and indignities that are still faced, and you're here. I was in the White House with my Democratic colleagues and I'm  --  again, I'm in my joy, I can't help it. And the President's asking our advice, who should be nominate and whatever. And I look at Kamala and we have a knowing glance, which we've had for years when she and I used to sit on this end of this committee at times. And then I try to get out to the President what it means, what it means. And I want to tell you when I look at you, this is why I get emotional. I'm sorry. You're  --  you're a person that is so much more than your race and gender. You're a Christian, you're a mom, you're  --  you're an intellect, you love books. But for me, I'm sorry, I  --  it's hard for me not to look at you and not see my mom, not to see my  --  my cousins, one of them who had to come here and sit behind you. She had to be  --  she had to have your back. I see my ancestors and yours. Nobody's going to steal the joy of that woman in the street, or the calls that I'm getting or the texts. Nobody's going to steal that joy. You have earned this spot. You are worthy. You are a great American. Your hero is Constance Baker Motley. Mine, who she has sat on my desk For my offices that I've held. She's my icon of America. Her name is Harriet Tubman. There is a love in this country that is extraordinary. You admitted it about your parents. They loved this nation, even though there were laws preventing them from getting together. When they were loving, there were laws in this country that would have prevented you from marrying your husband. It wasn't that long ago. It was last generation. But they didn't stop loving this country, even though this country didn't love them back. And what were the words of your heroes and mine? What did Constance Baker Motley do? Did she  --  this country that she saw insult and injuries. When she came out of law school, law firms wouldn't even hire her because she was a woman. Did she become bitter? Did she try to create a revolution? No. She used the very constitution of this nation. She loved it so much. She wanted America to be America. As Langston Hughes wrote, oh, let America be America again; the land that never has been yet, but yet must be the land where everyone is free. Oh, yes, I say it. Plain America never was America to me, but I swear this oath, America will be. That is the story of how you got to this desk. [*]CORY BOOKER: You and I and everyone here, generations of folk who came here and said America, I'm Irish. You may say no Irish or dogs need apply, but I'm going to show this country that I can be free here. I can make this country love me as much as I love it. Chinese Americans first forced into mere slave labor building our railroads, connecting our country, saw the ugliest of America. But they were going to build their home here. And America, you may not love me yet, but I am going to make this nation live up to its promise and hope. LGBTQ Americans from Stonewall. Women to Seneca. Hidden figures who didn't even get their play until some Hollywood movie finally talked about them and how they were critical for us defying gravity. All of these people loved America. And so you faced insults here that were shocking to me. Well, actually not shocking. But you are here because of that kind of love. And nobody's taking this away from me. So you got five more folk to go through, five more of us. And then you can sit back and let us have all the debates. And I'm going to tell you it's going to be a well charted Senate floor because it's not going to stop. They're going to accuse you of this and that. Heck in honor of your person who shares your birthday, you might be called the Communist. But don't worry, my sister. Don't worry. God has got you. And how do I know that? Because you're here and I know what it's taken for you to sit in that seat. Harriet Tubman is one of my heroes because the more I read about this person --  the more  --  I mean, she was viciously beaten. Her whole life she used to fall into spell  --  cracked skull. She faced starvation, chased by dogs, and when she got to freedom, what did she do? Did she rest? No. She went back. Again and again and again. The star was  --  the sky was full of stars, but she found one that was a harbinger of hope for better days, not just for her and those people that were enslaved, but a harbinger of hope for this country. And she never gave up on America. She fought that  -- led troops in the Civil War. She was involved in the suffrage movement. And as I came back from my run, after being near assaulted by  --  by someone on the street, I thought about her and how she looked up. She kept looking up no matter what they did to her. She never stopped looking up. And that star, it was a harbinger of hope. Today, you're my star. You are my harbinger of hope. This country is getting better and better and better. And when that final vote happens and you ascend onto the  --  one of the highest court in the land, I'm going to rejoice and I'm going to tell you right now, the greatest country in the world, the United States of America will be better because of you. Thank you. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Booker. We're going to take a ten minute break, and come back and have the last five Senators ask their questions. [*]DICK DURBIN: The committee will resume with Senator Kennedy of Louisiana. JOHN KENNEDY: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Judge, I want to continue where we left off yesterday, and try to get -- if I can, get to the essence of this tension between judicial power and judicial restraint. You have testified, and stop me if I get this wrong, that judges should stay in their lane. And I think it's fair to say that one of your definitions of staying in your lane is that judges don't make policy. Am I right so far? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, that is correct, Senator. JOHN KENNEDY: Then how do you explain  --  or help me understand the following. We have a judicially created doctrine, with no textual basis either in the Constitution or a statute, called substantive due process. And through substantive due process, our  --  our federal courts  --  let's just narrow it down, the United States Supreme Court has given itself the authority to read into the Constitution unenumerated, unmentioned rights, not read the Constitution and say, well, there it is, freedom of speech. But these are unmentioned, unenumerated. Isn't that ex  --  making policy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, the Supreme Court interprets provisions of the Constitution, and there are provisions of the Constitution that require interpretation because they don't, just on the text in every circumstance, answer the question before the court. So, due process, what  --  what does that mean? And the Supreme Court has  --  the words due process do appear in the text of the Constitution. And the question is what  --  what is covered by that provision. The Supreme Court  --  oh, sorry. Oh, go ahead. JOHN KENNEDY: I'm just going to say, but when they do it, aren't they making policy? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, Senator, the role of the judiciary is to interpret the law. To the extent that somebody argues to the court that there's been a violation of the due process clause of the Constitution, it is within the role of the court to determine what that means, whether the person is correct, that what happened with respect to their case violated the due process clause. And so, there's an interpretive function that is a part of the judicial function. JOHN KENNEDY: Here  --  let me see if I can put a finer point on this. It's not the right so much, it's  --  it's  --  it's how the right is created. So, I asked you yesterday whether you think that unenumerated  --  these unenumerated, unmentioned rights ought to be decided by the people through their elected representatives versus the  --  the federal judiciary.Let's take two rights that I talked about yesterday, the right to assisted suicide, the right of a transgender woman to participate in women's sports. I can see how  --  I'm not predicting that  --  that it will, but I could see how the court, either through the due process clause or the ninth amendment, could find those rights in the Constitution.As we talked about yesterday, the Supreme Court has  --  looks to me like they've adopted the  --  the  --  the policy of there is no test for a fundamental right. There's several tests. And in Obergefell, Justice Kennedy cited with approval Justice Harlan's dissent in  --  in Pavillion [Ph], which says there's no test. We go case by case.And the  --  but I know there are tests like  --  I'll get the language here somewhere. I've got it. I don't want to look it up, but implicit in the concept of ordered liberty, and you've talked about that. Here's a new one that Justice Kennedy talked about in Obergefell. He said inherent in the concept of individual autonomy.Well, I can see how if the court, with five votes, wanted to say, even though the right to assisted suicide or the right of a transgender woman to participate in women's sports, I  --  I could see how somebody  --  you're smart. You could write an opinion and say that's  --  that's inherent in the concept of individual autonomy.And  --  and maybe  --  again, it's not the right. It's who's supposed to decide. And that's where the judicial restraint comes in. I mean, don't you think that the values of ordinary Americans and their ability to decide these issues are just as good as those of  --  of five members of the Supreme Court? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. There are policy determinations that are made by vote in  --  absolutely in the democratic process. People get to decide things. The question and the difficulty is when you have a constitutional scheme of government and you have a constitution that does protect certain rights, and it does so in a circumstance in which those rights, whatever they are, enumerated or  --  or not are, might be things that the people have disagreed with. That's the tension, that  --  that although we have democracy, as we do, and people vote and  --  and should absolutely, we also have a constitution that protects certain rights against the sort of majority will about those things. JOHN KENNEDY: But the rub, of course, is  --  I agree with everything you said. But the rub is these are un  --  unenumerated rights. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN KENNEDY: They're written in the Constitution. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN KENNEDY: And what troubles me  --  I'm not saying I disagree with all the rights that the Supreme Court has created, but I don't think we talk honestly enough about how those rights should be adjudicated. For example, I  --  I'm not asking you to comment on this. I think you already have. But  --  but when President Biden announced your appointment, or at least shortly before, he talked about I want a judge that's going to read new rights into the Constitution through the Ninth Amendment. And I'm sure some Americans are saying that's a good thing, but you got a lot of Americans going, hey, wait a minute. The Supreme Court isn't elected. I  --  a couple years ago, Chief of staff Ron Klain wrote an opinion piece, and he said he hopes, and I'm going to quote, that the  --  quote, the Supreme  --  I hope the Supreme Court will intervene whenever the nation's conscience and laws need a jolt in a progressive direction. *** Text Missing *** [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I think so. JOHN KENNEDY: One is not more dangerous than the other. If that's true, then the sentencing rules ought to be the same. Okay. I don't -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: -- It's a policy matter for Congress. You could make them differently if you wanted to  -- JOHN KENNEDY: --  Right. But this  --  this is what I want to ask you. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yeah. JOHN KENNEDY: Based on your experience  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  Yeah  -- JOHN KENNEDY: --  You've been on the bench a decade. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN KENNEDY: Is crack cocaine more dangerous than powder or less or the same? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a policy determination. That's what policymakers do. They look at the evidence related to these things and they decide what's more dangerous  -- JOHN KENNEDY: --  But what have you seen  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  What should  --  I have seen evidence through the Sentencing Commission that the two compositions are chemically similar. So similar as to be indistinguishable. And the commission for very many years as a policymaking body indicated its view that they should be equivalent and lobbied Congress concerning that. And Congress made a determination about  --  in the policy realm making it 18 to one instead of 100 to one, which is what it had previously been. JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. DICK DURBIN: Thank you, Senator Kennedy. And now Senator Padilla. ALEX PADILLA: Mr. Chairman, before I begin I know you're being very mindful of the clock. So I just want to say I have two initial more substantive questions and then I think two very brief questions, but are very important. So I'll get right to it. Judge Jackson, I am so glad that you take such pride in sharing your family's story. As you should. I know I take pride in sharing mine. My colleagues have heard it, but I never get tired of reminding folks that I am the proud son of immigrants. My parents came to United States from Mexico decades ago and through their hard work and determination they raised three of us, my sister, my brother and I. We all attended and graduated from college and we have all found successful careers in public service. Now it's a story that is shared by hardworking immigrant families across the country. And over the course of generations, families who worked diligently each day to create a better life and to contribute to the country. Whether it's as farm workers, short order cooks, celebrity chefs, software engineers, or Tech CEOs, as school custodians, teachers, principals, whether they're documented or undocumented. People who migrate to this country seeking asylum, seeking refuge, or a shot at the American dream all deserve to be treated with dignity and humanity. Now unfortunately, our laws and our courts don't always do that. Beyond our often cruel and counterproductive choices that we've made over the years when it comes to immigration policy, the language that we use to speak about immigrants can often have dehumanizing effects. For example, in the Immigration and Nationality Act, it's replete with references to quote unquote aliens. And court opinions written by federal judges across the country can be found referring to undocumented persons as quote illegal aliens. Now I know NASA has put a man on the moon and there are billionaires increasingly exploring space. But let's be clear. No person is an alien. And no human being can be illegal. So with that context, I read your immigration related decisions on the district court with great interest. Now beyond the substance of your opinions, what  --  what stood out to me is that you seem to have tried to avoid making the same choice as many of your predecessors and many of your colleagues when not quoting statutes or precedent. Your appearan  --  your opinions appear not to refer to immigrants as alien or illegal. Instead you use terms such as undocumented and non-citizen. I imagine  --  I hope that was a conscious choice. The language we use and the language our courts use to describe people, whether immigrants, the formerly incarcerated, individuals who identify as LGBTQ, or other historically marginalized people really matters a great deal. Our language matters. It's exactly for that reason that six years ago Congress passed a bill to remove derogatory and offensive references to black Americans, Asian Americans, and Native Americans from the US code. And it's why last year President Biden ordered the Customs and Border Protection Agency and ICE to stop referring to migrants as illegal immigrants. With all that said, Judge Jackson, do you agree that the language we used to describe one another and the language used by the bench matters? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. As I mentioned earlier in this hearing, judges are the only branch of government who are required to write our opinions, to explain our decisions. And I have long believed in that capacity that our clarity and language matters. We're explaining the law to people and people read and understand what the law is, what the rule of law is in this country through the opinions of judges. So they do matter, language. ALEX PADILLA: Thank you. Now I want to discuss with you an issue of law and technology, an issue previously raised by Senator Ossoff earlier today. And I'm excited to talk to you about this topic. Just as an aside, any day that an MIT engineer gets to question a Harvard lawyer, it's a good day. [Laughter] So thank you for indulging. But as you know, the Supreme Court only hears a tiny fraction of all federal appeals. That means that the cases that get to the Supreme Court are typically either new questions of law or very difficult questions of law. And I think the intersection of law and technology is one where many cases are both new and difficult. Over the set  --  over the course of human history, innovation has constantly disrupted our culture and our norms and for the most part with good intentions. But societal benefits have not always been the result of innovation. Innovations have challenged us to respond with new means of safeguarding basic rights, whether in the context of privacy, security, competition, employment, just to name a few. And I appreciate that the speed of innovation will always challenge our ability to keep the law up to date with new technologies and their impact. I've grappled with this question as a city council member, as a state Senator, as a Secretary of State, and now as a United States Senator. But clearly it's also a challenge for the courts, which often have to decide cases during that period between technological progress and the enactment of new laws that seek to account for that progress. Now new technology alone has given rise to a number of fundamental questions of law, as you mentioned yesterday and earlier, including how the fourth amendment applies to new contexts that no founder could have ever contemplated. And likewise, the court has to grapple with questions like how copyright law applies to computer code. And in the coming years, new technologies will present new questions, not just in the context of the fourth amendment but in areas of communications, energy, transportation, healthcare, and many others. So if you can take just a minute, Judge, to discuss the challenges that courts at every level face in addressing cases involving new and emerging technologies and how you as a Supreme Court justice would begin to prepare for these types of cases. [*]JOHN KENNEDY: That's policy. Do you agree with that statement? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Do -- do I agree with the statement that that's policymaking or -- I'm sorry  -- JOHN KENNEDY: No, do you agree with what the chief said? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Senator, that's a political statement made by someone in the executive branch. JOHN KENNEDY: I'm not going to push it. [Laughter] I get it. It's not a good time to make chief of Staff mad is it? [Laughter] Well, I  --  I just  --  I hope you'll keep this in mind, Judge, if you're confirmed. I mean this is what judicial res  --  restraint [Ph] is all about. And I think part of the division in our country  --  America is a big, wide open, diverse, sometimes dysfunctional, but  -- sometimes imperfect, but basically good country. But we  --  we  --  we have different values. That's part of our diversity. And I think our country works because of our system of federalism. The values in Louisiana may be different from the values in Maine. And if you don't like what's going on in Maine, and you don't  --  like what's going on in Louisiana, you can move. But as our federal government has gotten bigger and bigger and bigger and bigger, what  --  what  --  what we had is  --  what is developed, at least here in Washington, is this managerial elite. And I'm  --  when I say the managerial elite, I mean  --  I mean the entrenched politicians, I guess, I shouldn't say entrenched, because that's pejorative. But we do have a lot of politicians that have been here a long time. There are members of the media that are part of the managerial elite. They're members of the administrative state. They're academics that are part of it. There are a lot of corporate phonies that are part of it. And many people in this  --  this cabal think they are smarter and more virtuous than the American people. And that they ought to set forth how people should live their lives. People should shut up and just do what they're told. And if they behave, maybe the managerial elite won't [Ph] let them eat meat occasionally. And I think it's part of the vision in our country. And I think to some extent the Supreme Court, I don't want to say contributes to it, but it needs to be mindful of this. I'll give you another example. And this case bothers me. I want you to explain it. I think Lindsey talked to you about it, but I don't know that  --  I want to hear you explain it. It's Make the Road New York versus McAleenan [Ph]. You remember that one? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I do. JOHN KENNEDY: Yeah. Here  --  here's the way I read it. Congress  -- we  --  in a rare moment of consensus, gave DS  --  DHS the sole and unreviewable  --  those are not my words they're in the statute  --  the sole and unreviewable right to determine when illegal immigrants should be removed on an expedited basis. The Department of Health  --  of Homeland Security, taking the statute, decided to use its sole and unreviewable authority or discretion to state that we're going to have expedited removal of all illegal immigrants who've been in the US less than two years. And you said no. And not only that, but you issued a universal injunction. And I don't understand why. You talked about judicial activism, and I don't see how clearer Congress could have been. Now, the DC Circuit reversed you, but I'm  --  I want to hear your reasons for  --  for issuing that nationwide injunction. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator for allowing me to address that decision in that case. The statute at issue gave discretion to DHS to determine the amount of time that a person needed to have been in the country, between zero and 24 months, in order to be subject to expedited removal as opposed to the normal removal process in the immigration system. The statute said the DHS had sole discretion, meaning no  --  I interpreted, meaning no other agency was to have the authority to make that determination. And the statute said that DHS's determination in that regard was unreviewable, meaning it was final. Once  --  this is how I'm interpreting, meaning that once the decision was made, it was over. Nobody else gets to review. The court doesn't get to say, no, you're wrong if you pick 12 months for example, or 16 months or 24 months as they did in this case. The statue did not speak to whether Congress intended with that grant of very broad discretion to exclude another statute that Congress has passed that directs agencies when Congress gives them discretion it  --  the other statute, the APA, directs agencies as to how they go about making decisions that Congress has given them the authority to make. The APA is a procedural statute. It says to agencies, when Congress gives you discretion to make a determination, you have to do so in a way that's not arbitrary and capricious. You have to use your expertise in certain kinds of decisions you have to use notice and comment in order to get information. It's procedural. The claim that was being made in this case, as I read it and understood it, was not that the agency couldn't pick 24 months, because obviously Congress had said in the statute you can pick between zero and 24 months, the claim that was being made is that the agency picked 24 months arbitrarily in violation of Congress's direction about how you go about the  -- JOHN KENNEDY: The APA was violated? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. The claim was an APA violation. So no one was saying that the statute was violated in the sense that the agency did something that it couldn't have done per the statute picking 24 months. They said the APA was violated because, this is the claim that they were making  -- JOHN KENNEDY: Sure. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: --  because the agency did no analysis. The agency did no expertise. The agency did not evaluate. Okay, if you've been here six months, these are the kinds of ties that you have. If you've been here 18 months  -- JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. Got it. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: The agency didn't do anything. Essentially according to the claimants, the agency heard the President say we're going to now do 24 months when everybody else, all of the other administrations  -- JOHN KENNEDY: I got it. I'm interrupting you cause I only got two  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, I'm sorry. All right. JOHN KENNEDY: As I hear you  --  what I hear you saying is  --  tell me if I'm wrong  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes. JOHN KENNEDY: They  --  they didn't follow the APA in your opinion? Which you have to do even though Congress passed the statute  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Well, no, because two things. One, is the APA under DC  --  longstanding DC Circuit case law is presumptively applicable to every situation in which an agency is exercising its discretion. So that's the first thing. It's always there as a background rule. So the DC Circuit has said, Congress has to be pretty clear when it decides to exclude the APA when it's saying I'm giving you discretion, but you can do this arbitrarily, you can do it however you want. And in other places, in the immigration statute that sets up expedited removal, Congress says we are excluding the APA. We're telling you that with respect to this kind of discretion, the APA doesn't apply, JOHN KENNEDY: Okay. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: So here I had these two statutes and there are canons of statutory interpretation that says that you should try to give effect to all of the will of Congress. You should try to read statutes so that they go together in a way if you have these two directives. And there's also DC Circuit case law  -- JOHN KENNEDY: Judge, I gotta stop you  -- KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: All right. JOHN KENNEDY: Because I'm  --  I got to  --  [Laughter] KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: And  --  and let me just say I agree that the DC Circuit reversed me. They disagreed with my interpretation, and that's the way that our system works. JOHN KENNEDY: Let me ask this last question. This is  --  this is a question about based on your experience. Can we agree that if  --  I want to emphasize if, cocaine is cocaine, that crack cocaine is equal in  --  in its  --  its danger, the powdered cocaine. You with me? [*]KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. The court does get cases that involve disputes that touch on technological innovation, whether it is something like a copyright kind of case or a patent kind of case or the fourth amendment  search and seizure. New technologies do intersect with what -- what the law says in the Constitution and in statutes. And at least as far as statutes are concerned, it's certainly much easier for judges who are doing their duty to interpret the law if Congress makes changes that update the statutes to track the modern innovations. What happens with constitutional interpretation is similar to what I described earlier about cases in which the court analogizes back to the time of the founding concerning the principles in something like search and seizure, what qualified as a search that violated the Constitution when those words were written, and then determines whether that same kind of violation is at issue with respect to the technology today. And the court has done that with respect to searches regarding cell phones, police access to GPS data, tracking technology that is put on vehicles, because these disputes do come up. And so -- so I'll take this opportunity to encourage Congress to help us by ensuring that new technologies are addressed in statutes that we interpret. ALEX PADILLA: You're absolutely right. Both judges and members of Congress are never done doing more homework and learning, hopefully.Judge, on Monday, which at this point feels like so long ago, I suggested in my opening statement that by the end of these hearings America would know just how qualified you are to serve on the Supreme Court. And over the course of this hearing, I think the American people have seen that and have gotten to know you as a person. They heard your family's journey and everything that your nomination represents. Now, I also said on Monday that your qualifications bear repeating over and over again. And so, Judge, with your help, I'd like to remind the committee and the American people once again just some of your incredible credentials. Yes or no, after law school, did you serve as a law clerk for a district court judge, a court of appeals judge, and a Supreme Court justice? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I did, Senator. ALEX PADILLA: Yes or no, did you practice law for more than ten years before becoming a judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Yes, Senator. ALEX PADILLA: And did that include time in private practice and time as a federal public defender? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: It did. ALEX PADILLA: How many years have you served as a federal district court judge? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: I served as a federal district court judge for, I believe, eight and a half years. ALEX PADILLA: And circuit since then. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Circuit since last June. ALEX PADILLA: And as a district court judge, approximately how many opinions did you write? I think we've covered this before. KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: As a district court judge, I believe I wrote somewhere in the neighborhood of 560. ALEX PADILLA: With a very low rate of having been reversed, if I've done my homework correctly.Look, I can go on and on. And don't worry. Mr. Chairman, I won't. But, Judge Jackson, for two days, here's what I've seen. I've seen a number of my colleagues trying to engage with you in good faith on questions about the law, and you've answered them fully, fairly, and thoughtfully in every instance. You've shown yourself to have the keen intellect and legal acumen to serve on the Supreme Court. Now, you've also sat here and politely listened as some of my colleagues have attempted to disparage your judgment and character based on allegations that even, as Senator Booker pointed out, conservative commentators have called meritless to the point of demagoguery. And through that, you've shown clearly that you had the temperament to serve on the Supreme Court. Now, this confirmation hearing has been a reminder and in some ways a new Exhibit A that, for people of color, particularly those who have the audacity to try to be the first, often have to work twice as hard to get half the respect. Judge Jackson, I offer that, with your talent and exemplary qualifications on full display, if my colleagues truly believe in maintaining the legitimacy of the Supreme Court, if they really care about Americans' faith in the judicial system, they will see that even if they may disagree with you on a particular area of the law, that you're exactly the type of judge that should serve on the Supreme Court.You're exactly the type of judge that should receive bipartisan support, not just from this committee but from the full Senate. And if any senator doesn't, then I hope they'll think long and hard about what it says to the country about the politicize  --  politicization of the Supreme Court, that if someone as eminently qualified as Judge Jackson, in all the ways that we've been discussing, cannot receive bipartisan support.Judge, and there's just a couple of minutes left, and I'd like to ask you just one last question. Last Friday, in my preparation for these hearings I took the opportunity to spend some time with a group of students at South San Francisco High School. I went there to speak with them about this historic Supreme Court nomination and to speak with them about you. We had a great conversation about how the court's decisions affect the everyday lives of Americans and about the past and the future of the Supreme Court. But as I was speaking with the students, I couldn't help but be reminded of my own high school experience, when one of my teachers discouraged me from applying to MIT because they didn't want me to be disappointed. I turned that discouragement into motivation. Judge Jackson, I know that you too have been doubted on your way to the seat that you find yourself in today. Even over the last three days of this hearing, your experience and qualifications have been called into question by some, despite your clear lengthy record of talent, achievement, and accomplishment.So, I want to end my time today by asking you this question. On behalf of the young people I visited with last Friday in South San Francisco and for the many others across the country who are watching this confirmation hearing today, what would you say, Judge Jackson, to all those young Americans, the most diverse generation in our nation's history? What do you say to some of them who may doubt that they can one day achieve the same great heights that you have? KETANJI BROWN JACKSON: Thank you, Senator. That was very moving, and I appreciate the opportunity to speak to young people. I appreciate it very much. I do it a lot for the reasons that you have articulated. I  --  I hope to inspire people to try to follow this path because I love this country, because I love the law, because I think it is important that we all invest in our future.ClassificationLanguage: ENGLISHSubject: SUPREME COURTS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); JUDGES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2016 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2020 (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (79%); WITNESSES (78%); ELECTIONS (74%)Person: KETANJI BROWN JACKSON (93%); JON OSSOFF (92%); ALEX PADILLA (79%); BEN SASSE (79%); JOE BIDEN (79%); JOHN NEELY KENNEDY (79%); JOSH HAWLEY (79%); MARSHA BLACKBURN (79%); MAZIE K HIRONO (79%); RICHARD BLUMENTHAL (79%); RICHARD DURBIN (79%); TED CRUZ (79%); THOM TILLIS (79%); TOM COTTON (79%); JOHN F KENNEDY (76%); CORY BOOKER (74%); JOHN CORNYN (74%); AMY KLOBUCHAR (59%); CHRIS COONS (59%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (59%); DIANNE FEINSTEIN (59%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (59%); MIKE LEE (59%); PATRICK LEAHY (59%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (59%)Geographic: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); TEXAS, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%); IOWA, USA (79%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (91%)Load-Date: March 23, 2022End of Document | About LexisNexis | Privacy Policy | Terms & Conditions | Copyright © 2020 LexisNexisMorgan RichardsonPage 2 of 3Senate Judiciary Committee Holds Hearing on the Nomination of Ketanji Brown Jackson to be an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States, Day 3